1284474	Mutation creating a new splice site in the growth hormone receptor genes of 37 Ecuadorean patients with Laron syndrome. Laron syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by resistance to growth hormone. We sought to determine the molecular basis of this condition in an Ecuadorean population with a high incidence of affected individuals. Growth hormone receptor gene sequences from an obligate heterozygote were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction and screened for mutations using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Only exon 6 revealed homo- and heteroduplexes on denaturing gradient gels. Sequencing revealed a substitution of guanine for adenine in the third position of codon 180 that did not change the amino acid encoded. Sequencing of the exon 6-exon 7 splice junction from RNA-polymerase chain reaction amplified cellular RNA of an affected individual revealed that the substitution activates a 5' splice site 24 nucleotides upstream from the normal exon 6-intron 6 boundary. Splicing in two probands' lymphoblasts occurred virtually exclusively at the abnormal 5' splice site created by the codon 180 substitution. Exon 6 sequences from 38 patients and 47 relatives were amplified and analyzed by sequencing or dot-blot hybridization with allele-specific oligonucleotides. The substitution was detected in 74 of 76 Laron syndrome patients' GH-receptor alleles. All 26 parents and 12 of 21 unaffected siblings were heterozygous for this mutation. It was absent in 61 unrelated unaffected control individuals. We conclude that the codon 180 nucleotide substitution probably causes Laron syndrome as translation of the observed, abnormally spliced growth hormone receptor transcript would lead to the synthesis of a receptor protein with an 8 amino acid deletion from the extracellular domain.
1284534	Mutations and sequence variations detected in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene: a report from the Cystic Fibrosis Genetic Analysis Consortium. Cystic fibrosis is the most common autosomal disorder in the Caucasian population. Since the description of the major mutation of this disease in 1989, over 150 of additional mutations have been identified in the CFTR gene. This update summarizes the different mutations identified and reported before March 15 by members of the international Cystic Fibrosis Genetic Analysis Consortium. The report includes information on DNA sequence variations found in the gene.
1284538	Four new mutations of the CFTR gene (541delC, R347H, R352Q, E585X) detected by DGGE analysis in Italian CF patients, associated with different clinical phenotypes. The delta 508 mutation accounts for about 53% of the molecular defects causing cystic fibrosis (CF) in Italy. The numerous additional mutations detected so far are all relatively rare, and about 30% of CF chromosomes carries unknown mutations in our patients. In order to identify the non-delta F508 mutations causing CF in our population, we performed GC-clamped denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) on 9 exons of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene in a sample of 86 Italian CF patients carrying unknown mutations on at least one chromosome. Direct sequencing of 17 samples showing an altered electrophoretic mobility allowed the identification of four new mutations (541delC, R347H, R352Q, and E585X), five mutations already known (G85E, I148T, G178R, 1078delT, and R347P), and one rare variant (1898 + 3A-->G). The strategy based on GC-clamped DGGE represents an efficient and rapid approach for mutation detection for those genetic diseases, such as CF, in which a large number of rare molecular defects has been described.
1301924	Myotonic dystrophy: another case of too many repeats? Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is an adult form of muscular dystrophy affecting about 1 in 8,000 individuals in most populations. Although common symptoms include progressive muscle weakness and stiffness, it is characterised by a heterogeneous clinical picture. Despite this variation in both the nature and severity of the symptoms seen in affected individuals, DM is genetically homogeneous, segregating as a single locus on the proximal long arm of human chromosome 19. As the biochemical abnormality underlying the disease was unknown, a reverse genetics (or positional cloning) strategy for identifying the gene responsible was adopted. The resulting collaborative effort culminated in the detection of the molecular mutation event and the gene within which it lies: the expansion of a trinucleotide repeat (CTG) at the 3' end of a gene encoding a member of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase family. This has diagnostic implications since an easy, reliable and predictive test can now be offered to individuals with a family history of DM. These findings are also a prerequisite for further studies concerning the biochemical and physiological aetiology of DM and possible therapeutic strategies. In addition, the striking similarity between findings at the DNA level in DM and those in fragile X syndrome and spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy suggests that the mechanism leading to the increase in copy number of trinucleotide repeats at particular loci may be responsible for a number of other genetic diseases.
1301930	A comprehensive scanning method for rapid detection of beta-globin gene mutations and polymorphisms. We describe a scanning procedure for the detection of beta-globin gene mutations and the prenatal diagnosis of beta-thalassemias. The method is based on the combined use of PCR and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) of six amplified fragments encompassing the whole beta-globin coding region and splice junctions, as well as the promoter and 3' untranslated regions. The whole beta-globin gene can be rapidly scanned for the presence of deleterious mutations. The proposed diagnostic strategy provides a major improvement over current approaches to beta-globin gene analysis in both research and clinical laboratories, especially those which analyse DNA samples from individuals belonging to various ethnic or population groups. The use of this procedure has enabled us to detect six novel sequence changes in the beta-globin gene, including two deleterious mutations and four polymorphisms.
1301931	Polymorphic variation within "conserved" sequences at the 3' end of the human RDS gene which results in amino acid substitutions. The human RDS gene, previously mapped to chromosome 6p, encodes a protein found in the outer disc membrane of the photoreceptor cells of the retina. The cDNA sequence of the human gene shows 85% identity with the bovine peripherin gene and the rds (retinal degeneration slow) genes from mouse and rat. Mutations in the RDS gene have recently been implicated in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) in some families. Here we present evidence that the third exon of this gene is subject to polymorphic variation in humans. The three sequence alterations described in this paper give rise to amino acid substitutions. However, as these missense mutations also occur in the normal population they are not implicated as causing adRP. Interestingly such sequence variation is not found within other species examined including mouse and bovine. These intragenic polymorphisms will be of future potential value in studies to locate further disease causing mutations in adRP patients in the RDS gene.
1301933	Rapid preparation of genomic DNA from dried blood and saliva spots for polymerase chain reaction.
1301950	Detection of sequence variants in the gene for human type II procollagen (COL2A1) by direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction-amplified genomic DNA. The direct sequencing of the human type II procollagen (COL2A1) gene from polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified genomic DNA is described. Thirty-two regions of the COL2A1 gene were asymmetrically amplified with intron primers which were specifically chosen to amplify a region spanning 500 to 800 bp of sequence encoding one or more exons and their accompanying intervening sequences. Primers for dideoxynucleotide sequencing of the PCR products were then designed to provide complete exon sequence information and to insure that intron:exon splice junction sequence data would be obtained. Amplification and sequencing reactions were performed on an automated workstation to facilitate the handling of multiple DNA templates. The procedure allowed efficient sequencing of over 25,000 bp of each allele of the COL2A1 gene per diploid genome. We used this method for the comparative analyses of COL2A1 sequences in DNA isolated from the blood of 42 unrelated individuals and we identified 21 neutral sequence variants in the gene. The sequence variations were confirmed by independent assays, including restriction enzyme digestion. The sequence variants described here will be important for identifying haplotypes of the type II procollagen gene that will be useful in defining a genetic etiology for diseases of cartilaginous tissues.
1301957	Molecular analysis of neurofibromatosis type 1 mutations. We have examined a panel of 115 unrelated NF1 individuals for mutation in the 3' region of the NF1 gene, using Southern blotting and polymerase chain reaction amplification of exons followed by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. We found only 2 unequivocal mutations: a 571 bp deletion which removed exon 6 and resulted in a frameshift in exon 7, and a 2 bp deletion in exon 1. A third sequence variation detected by SSCP was predicted to cause a lysine-arginine substitution in exon 6. This is a conservative change, and since the affected individual is a new mutation whose parents are not available, we cannot be sure of its biological significance. We detected mutations in at most 3% of individuals, from an analysis which covered 17% of the coding sequence by SSCP and a larger region by Southern blotting. This relative failure to detect mutations accords with the experience of others. Even allowing for the incomplete sensitivity of the methods used, the results suggest that the majority of NF1 mutations lie elsewhere in the coding sequence or outside it.
1363805	Mutations in the medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) gene. Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) catalyzes the first reaction of the beta-oxidation cycle for 4-10-carbon fatty acids. MCAD deficiency is one of the most frequent inborn metabolic disorders in populations of northwestern European origin. In the compilation of data from a worldwide study of 172 unrelated patients each representing an independent pedigree, a total of 8 different mutations have been identified. Among them, a single prevalent mutation, 985A-->G, was found in 90% of 344 variant alleles. 985A-->G causes glutamate substitution for lysine-304 in the mature MCAD subunit, which causes impairment of tetramer assembly and instability of the protein. Three of 7 rarer mutations have been identified in a few unrelated patients, while the remaining 4 have each been found in only a single pedigree. In addition to tabulating the mutations, the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase gene family, the structure of the MCAD gene and the evolution of 985A-->G mutation are briefly discussed.
7509237	Complex mutation 4114 ATA-->TT in exon 22 of the cystic fibrosis gene CFTR.
7537150	Identification of six mutations (R31L, 441delA, 681delC, 1461ins4, W1089R, E1104X) in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Six new mutations have been identified in the CFTR gene. These mutations, representing three different categories--missense (R31L, W1098R), nonsense (E1104X), and frameshift (441delA, 681delC, 1461ins4)--are located in exons 2, 4, 5, 9, and 17b of the gene and presumed to cause cystic fibrosis (CF) in patients. All these mutations are probably rare in the population, as no additional examples were found for any of them in a cohort of 545 CF patients. Our study also revealed a benign sequence variation (3499 + 45T-->C) in intron 17b.
7550228	Detection and genetic analysis of beta-thalassemia mutations by competitive oligopriming. A new approach for the detection of beta-thalassemia mutations has been applied, based on competitive oligonucleotide priming (COP) of in vitro DNA amplification at the mutation site. This method allows genotyping of the template DNA, through differential labeling of the allele-specific competitive oligoprimers and biotinylation of the common reverse primer. The system provides a basis for rapid, simple, and reliable detection of the numerous known beta-thalassemia mutations, revealing the precise nature of the mismatch in each case, and thereby facilitating the molecular genetic analysis of the disease.
7550232	Four novel mutations underlying mild or intermediate forms of alpha-L-iduronidase deficiency (MPS IS and MPS IH/S). The alpha-L-iduronidase deficiency diseases (Mucopolysaccharidosis I) cover a spectrum of clinical severity ranging from the very severe (Hurler syndrome, MPS IH) through an intermediate (Hurler/Scheie syndrome, MPS IH/S) to a relatively mild form (Scheie syndrome, MPS IS). Numerous mutations of the gene encoding alpha-L-iduronidase (IDUA) are known in Hurler syndrome, but only three in the other disorders. We report on novel mutations of the IDUA gene in one patient with the Scheie syndrome and in three patients with the Hurler/Scheie syndrome. The novel mutations, all single base changes, encoded the substitutions R492P (Scheie), and X654G, P496L, and L490P (Hurler/Scheie). The L490P mutation was apparently homozygous, whereas each of the others was found in compound heterozygosity with a Hurler mutation. The deleterious nature of the mutations was confirmed by absence of enzyme activity upon transfection of the corresponding mutagenized cDNAs into Cos-1 cells. These results provide additional information for genotype-phenotype correlations.
7581409	Two new mutations, Q473X and N487S, in a Caucasian patient with mucopolysaccharidosis IVA (Morquio disease).
7599639	Novel (cys152 > arg) missense mutation in an Arab patient with Canavan disease.
7599640	Mutations of the iduronate-2-sulfatase gene on a T146T background in three patients with Hunter syndrome.
7728151	Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene: correlations with phenotype. von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is an inherited neoplastic disease characterized by a predisposition to develop retinal angiomas, central nervous system hemangioblastomas, renal cell carcinomas, pancreatic cysts, and pheochromocytomas. The VHL gene was recently isolated by positional cloning. The cDNA encodes 852 nucleotides in 3 exons. The VHL gene is unrelated to any known gene families. We identified germline mutations in 85/114 (75%) of VHL families. Clinical heterogeneity is a well-known feature of VHL. VHL families were classified into 2 types based on the presence or absence of pheochromocytoma. The types of mutations responsible for VHL without pheochromocytoma (VHL type 1) differed from those responsible for VHL with pheochromocytoma (VHL type 2). Fifty-six % of the mutations responsible for VHL type 1 were microdeletions/insertions, nonsense mutations, or deletions; 96% of the mutations responsible for VHL type 2 were missense mutations. Specific mutations in codon 238 accounted for 43% of the mutations responsible for VHL type 2. The mutations identified in these families will be useful in presymptomatic diagnosis. The identification of mutations associated with phenotypes contributes to the understanding of fundamental genetic mechanisms of VHL disease.
7728155	Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase gene: a novel 68-bp deletion involving 3' splice site of intron 7, causing exon 8 skipping in a Caucasian patient with beta-ketothiolase deficiency.
7866409	Mutation at the catalytic site (M519V) in glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe disease).
7951257	Detecting prion protein gene mutations by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Mutations of the prion protein (PrP) gene are present in patients with Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome (GSS), familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), and fatal familial insomnia (FFI). We developed a denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) strategy that readily identifies point mutations in the PrP coding sequence. By comparison with appropriate controls, haplotypes often may be deduced. This method permits samples from many patients with GSS, CJD, as well as patients with unusual degenerative neurologic disorders, to be screened rapidly, sensitively, and inexpensively for the presence of known and novel PrP mutations. We illustrate the sensitivity of this approach by reporting 2 novel polymorphisms in the PrP coding sequence.
7981715	Complex arylsulfatase A alleles causing metachromatic leukodystrophy. Metachromatic leukodystrophy is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficiency of arylsulfatase A. Sequencing of the arylsulfatase A genes of a patient affected with late infantile metachromatic leukodystrophy revealed that the patient is a compound heterozygote of two alleles carrying two deleterious mutation each. One allele bears a splice donor site mutation together with two polymorphisms and an additional missense mutation (Gly122 > Ser). The splice donor site mutation and the Gly122 > Ser substitution have been described recently but on different alleles. The other allele carries two missense mutations causing a Gly154 > Asp and a Pro167 > Arg substitution. When arylsulfatase A cDNAs carrying these mutations separately or in combination were transfected into baby hamster kidney cells expression of arylsulfatase A activity could not be detected. Linkage of mutations was verified by sequencing of the parental DNAs. Biosynthesis studies performed with the patients' fibroblasts show that the enzyme carrying both mutations is synthesized in almost normal amounts but is rapidly degraded in an early biosynthetic compartment. The occurence of two disease causing mutations on the same allele is a novel phenomenon in metachromatic leukodystrophy and as far as lysosomal storage diseases are concerned have so far only been described in Fabry disease and in the complex glucocerebrosidase alleles associated with Gaucher disease.
7981720	Molecular characterization of a DDEI melting polymorphism at the angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) locus.
7981721	A tandem CC-->TT transition in the p53 gene of a breast cancer.
8019556	Mutations in PAX3 associated with Waardenburg syndrome type I. Waardenburg syndrome (WS) types I, II, and III (McKusick #14882, #19351, and #19350) are related autosomal dominant disorders characterized by sensorineural hearing loss, dystopia canthorum, pigmentary disturbances, and other developmental defects. Disease causing PAX3 mutations have been identified in a few families from each of the three disease subtypes, WS-I, WS-II, and WS-III. In others, although the mutations have not been pinpointed, linkage with the PAX3 locus on chromosome 2q35 has been demonstrated. The PAX3 protein is a transcription factor that contains both a paired-domain and a homeodomain DNA binding motif and appears to play a key role during embryogenesis. In this report, we describe two mutations in the human PAX3 gene that cause WS type I. One mutation is a deletion/frameshift in the paired-domain of PAX3 and results in a protein without functional DNA binding domains. The second mutation is a single-base substitution and results in a premature termination codon in the homeodomain of PAX3. This is the first demonstration of a mutation in the homeodomain DNA binding motif in this protein resulting in WS and one of the few examples of a mutation in a homeodomain of any protein that results in human disease.
8019568	Phenylketonuria in China: identification and characterization of three novel nucleotide substitutions in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene.
8081391	Mutations in steroid 21-hydroxylase (CYP21). The inherited inability to synthesize cortisol is termed congenital adrenal hyperplasia. More than 90% of cases are caused by 21-hydroxylase deficiency. This syndrome is characterized by signs of androgen excess and often mineralocorticoid deficiency. Steroid 21-hydroxylase (P450c21) is a microsomal enzyme expressed in the adrenal gland that catalyzes conversion of 17-hydroxyprogesterone and progesterone to 11-deoxycortisol and deoxycorticosterone respectively. In man, this enzyme is encoded by the CYP21 (CYP21B) gene which is located in the HLA major histocompatibility complex along with a pseudogene, CYP21P (CYP21A). Mutations in CYP21 causing congenital adrenal hyperplasia are almost all generated by recombinations between CYP21 and CYP21P. These recombinations either delete CYP21 or transfer deleterious mutations from CYP21P to CYP21, a process termed apparent gene conversion. The degree of enzymatic compromise caused by each mutation is correlated with the clinical severity of the deficiency observed in patients carrying that mutation.
8100466	Detection of polymorphisms using thermal cycling with a single oligonucleotide on a DNA sequencing gel. A method is described for the detection of restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) in single copy genes in mammalian cells using one 5'-labelled oligonucleotide. This linear amplification (LA) method employs a single oligonucleotide as primer, which is extended by Taq DNA polymerase up to a restriction enzyme cleavage site. The products are arithmetically amplified by thermal cycling. The size of the products are determined by the sequence of the oligonucleotide and the position of the restriction enzyme cleavage site. Hence, an RFLP can be observed by measuring the size of the products. Polymorphisms which differ in size by a small number of base pairs, as are found in (CA)n repeats, are especially suitable for analysis by the LA procedure since the products are run on DNA sequencing gels. A number of genes were examined by the procedure and all produced a satisfactory signal including GC-rich template. It is proposed that the LA method would be suitable for large-scale genetic linkage analysis. The LA procedure has many advantages including the ability to multiplex signals under the same conditions, and lower cost since only one primer is needed.
8199594	Identification of a point mutation and germinal mosaicism in a Duchenne muscular dystrophy family. Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD and BMD) are allelic X-linked disorders arising from mutations in the (2.4 Mb) dystrophin gene at Xp21. We have applied the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to identify a larger than normal dystrophin mRNA from a male with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and his younger affected brother. The increased size of the dystrophin mRNA was due to a splice-site mutation at the exon 26:intron 26 junction where a T to G substitution prevented normal RNA processing. A cryptic splice-site, downstream of the mutation, was activated during processing, resulting in the inclusion of 117 bases of intron 26. This insertion introduced an in-frame stop codon into the mature dystrophin mRNA. An allele-specific test was developed to identify the mutation and was applied to this family. Interestingly, the mother of the two affected boys did not carry the mutation, as determined by allele-specific amplification and direct DNA sequence analysis, indicating gonadal mosaicism. Her eldest daughter, designated as a carrier based upon conventional testing and haplotype analysis, also did not carry the family mutation. Initial haplotyping of the family appeared to be straightforward with gonadal mosaicism becoming evident only after allele-specific analysis. The application of linked markers to identify the disease allele for conventional genetic counselling would have been erroneous in this family and highlights the diagnostic power of precise identification of the disease-causing mutation.
8199597	Sequence of the -530 region of the beta-globin gene of sickle cell anemia patients with the Arabian haplotype.
8257990	Base substitutions in the human dystrophin gene: detection by using the single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique. We have established the experimental conditions to screen twenty regions of the dystrophin gene using the method of single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. The aim of this study was to identify point mutations in patients with Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD or BMD) who have no gross DNA rearrangements detectable by Southern blot analysis or multiplex exon amplification. The investigation of thirteen patients using this procedure resulted in the detection of seven sequence polymorphisms (four identified in this study) that will be useful allelic markers in familial DNA analysis. Three rare sequence variants could be found (two of them being novel variants) but we were unable to demonstrate mutations that could be clearly sufficient to be responsible for the phenotype. This analysis confirmed the efficiency of the SSCP technique for the detection of nucleotide substitutions. Application of this approach to mutation or polymorphism detection to other exons of the gene will improve carrier and prenatal diagnosis.
8318989	Screening for molecular pathologies in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Heteroduplex detection by hydrolink gel electrophoresis was performed to screen for small mutations in 12 Lesch-Nyhan syndrome families with characterised molecular pathology which included nine point mutations, two small deletions, and a 1-bp insertion. This modified protocol for heteroduplex detection by hydrolink gel electrophoresis detected all 12 of these mutations and was utilised to rapidly determine the carrier status of females from affected families. On the basis of these results this approach appears to be a rapid and reliable screening method for point mutations in addition to small length mutations and for carrier detection in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome.
8318991	Hunter syndrome: gene deletions and rearrangements.
8318995	Sporadic alleles, including a novel mutation, characterize beta-thalassemia in Ashkenazi Jews.
8364588	Paternal mosaicism for a COL1A1 dominant mutation (alpha 1 Ser-415) causes recurrent osteogenesis imperfecta. We describe a dominant point mutation in the COL1A1 gene causing extremely severe osteogenesis imperfecta (OI type II/III) which was detected in the dermal fibroblasts of a proband, diagnosed by ultrasonography at 24 weeks of gestation. Type I collagen secretion was reduced and pro alpha 1(I) chains were overmodified. The mutation was localised in one COL1A1 allele by chemical cleavage of mismatched bases in normal cDNA/proband's mRNA heteroduplexes, and identified by cloning and sequencing. A G-to-A transition which causes the substitution of Gly-415 with serine in the alpha 1(I) triple helical domain was found. The same mutation was detected in the father's spermatozoa and lymphocytes. Mosaicism in the father's germline explains the occurrence in the family of two additional OI pregnancies, which were documented by X-ray and ultrasound investigations.
8401541	Two new mutations at the adenosine deaminase (ADA) locus (Q254X and del nt1050-54) unusual for not being missense mutations.
8477262	Identification of mutations in Danish choroideremia families. We have searched for mutations in the choroideremia gene (CHM) in patients from 12 Danish families in which CHM is segregating. Employing polymerase chain reaction (PCR), single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis, and direct DNA sequencing, different mutations have been identified in 6 patients. All the mutations will interfere with the correct translation of the mRNA predicting a truncated protein or no gene product at all.
8477263	Molecular characterization of beta-thalassemia in Egyptians. We sought to determine the spectrum of mutations producing beta-thalassemia in Egypt using genomic PCR and a variety of mutation-screening procedures. Thirty-four beta-thalassemia and three Hb S/beta-thalassemia patients originating from different regions of Egypt were studied, and the causative mutation was found in 69 of 71 (97%) beta-thalassemia genes. Four mutations accounted for 78% of beta-thalassemia genes in this population; IVS-1, nt 110 (41%), IVS-1 nt 6 (13%), IVS-1, nt 1 (13%), and IVS-2, nt 848 (11%). The latter allele, a C-A mutation at the third nucleotide of an acceptor site consensus sequence, has been described previously only in one Egyptian, one Iranian, one Tunisian, and one Black American patient. Nine other alleles each accounted for 1-3% of beta-thalassemia genes. Among these was one codon 27 allele (Hb Knossos), two frameshift 106/107 alleles previously seen only in a Black American, and a rarely observed mutation in the distal promoter region of the beta-globin gene, -87 (C-A). Our results suggest that from a molecular genetic standpoint a beta-thalassemia prevention program based on carrier screening and prenatal diagnosis can be implemented in Egypt. In couples at risk for beta-thalassemia, the causative mutation should be identifiable in both members in 92% and in one member in the remaining 8%.
8535441	Comparison between medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase mutant proteins overexpressed in bacterial and mammalian cells. Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is a potentially lethal inherited defect in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids. By comparing the behaviour of five missense MCAD mutant proteins expressed in COS cells and in Escherichia coli, we can define some of these as "pure folding mutants." Upon expression in E. coli, these mutant proteins produce activity levels in the range of the wild-type enzyme only if the chaperonins GroESL are co-overproduced. When overexpressed in COS cells, the pure folding mutants display enzyme activities comparable to the wild-type enzyme. The results suggest that the MCAD mutations can be modulated by chaperones, a phenomenon that may influence the manifestation of the MCAD disease.
8535449	A 48-bp insertion between exon 13 and 14 of the HEXB gene causes infantile-onset Sandhoff disease.
8723680	Characterization of two arylsulfatase A missense mutations D335V and T274M causing late infantile metachromatic leukodystrophy. Metachromatic leukodystrophy is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficiency of arylsulfatase A. We describe a novel missense mutation in exon 6 causing the substitution of Asp335 by Val. In transient transfections no enzyme activity could be expressed from the arylsulfatase A cDNA carrying this mutation. Examination of the effects of the mutation in cells stably overexpressing the mutant enzyme revealed, that the mutant enzyme is catalytically inactive and degraded in an early biosynthetic compartment. We have also investigated the effects of a previously identified mutation (T274M). The specific catalytic activity of the Met274 substituted arylsulfatase is reduced to about 35% of the normal enzyme when measured with an artificial substrate. Most of this enzyme is also degraded in an early biosynthetic compartment.
8723688	Two novel frameshift mutations causing premature stop codons in a patient with the severe form of Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome.
8723698	Simple detection of a (Finnish) hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 mutation.
8829645	A 66-basepair insertion in exon 6 of the alpha-L-fucosidase gene of a fucosidosis patient.
8829650	Molecular basis of congenital erythropoietic porphyria: mutations in the human uroporphyrinogen III synthase gene. Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism that results from the markedly deficient activity of the fourth enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway, uroporphyrinogen III synthase (URO-synthase). To date, 17 mutations have been described including 11 missense, one nonsense, two mRNA splicing defects, one deletion and two coding region insertions. Most mutations have been identified in one or a few unrelated families with the exception of C73R and L4F which occurred in 29.6% and 9.3% of the 54 mutant alleles studied, respectively. Interestingly, analysis of the mutant alleles identified only 83% of the causative mutations, suggesting that about 20% of the mutations causing CEP lie elsewhere in the gene. Of note, mutation V82F, resulting from a G to T transversion of the last nucleotide of exon 4, caused both a missense mutation and an aberrantly spliced RNA transcript. Prokaryotic expression of the mutant URO-synthase alleles identified those with significant residual activity, thereby permitting genotype/phenotype predictions for this clinically heterogeneous disease.
8829663	Two novel (1098insA and Y313H) and one rare (R359Q) mutations detected in exon 8 of the beta-glucocerebrosidase gene in Gaucher's disease patients.
8956037	A novel deletion/inversion mutation in the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene as a cause of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. A combined deletion/inversion rearrangement of the LDL receptor gene was discovered in a Finnish patient with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Sequence analysis of the mutated allele revealed an insertion of 4 nucleotides in exon 11, caused by a combined deletion and insertion event replacing a 13-bp segment of the normal exon 11 sequence of the LDL receptor gene by a 17-bp stretch of new sequence at the deletion breakpoint. The inserted sequence was identical to the normal exon 9 sequence of the LDL receptor gene from nt1225 to nt1241 inserted in an inverted orientation. This defect causes a translational frameshift after amino acid 525 (glycine) and leads to a premature termination codon at amino acid position 538. Analysis of reverse transcriptase-PCR products from total RNA extracted from cultured fibroblasts revealed only transcripts encoded by the normal allele. This finding was consistent with the reduced functional activity of the LDL receptor found in the fibroblasts of the patient to levels less than 50% of those in normal cells. In conclusion, we have identified a complex and hitherto unreported type of rearrangement of the human LDL receptor gene. The precise mechanism of this mutation (designated as FH-Jalasjärvi) remains obscure, although it may involve complex loop formation by interaction of complementary sequences present in the mutation breakpoints and their immediate flanking regions.
8956047	A new mutation (LIPA Tyr22X) of lysosomal acid lipase gene in a Japanese patient with Wolman disease.
8956055	Identification of a novel R552O mutation in exon 13 of the beta-subunit of rod phosphodiesterase gene in a Spanish family with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa.
8956059	Three novel APC gene mutations in Portuguese FAP kindreds.
9067759	Three novel PAX3 mutations observed in patients with Waardenburg syndrome type 1.
9090528	Mutations and DNA diagnoses of classical citrullinemia. Classical citrullinemia is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a genetic deficiency of argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS). We have previously identified 20 mutations in ASS mRNA of human classical citrullinemia and already established the DNA diagnosis of seven mutations as follows. By Southern blot analysis, each of the alleles with exon 5 or 6 deletion in mRNA appears to involve deletion of genomic DNA from this region. Five mutations involving R304W, G324S, IVS-6(-2) (delta Ex7), IVS-13(+5) (delta Ex13), and delta 13 bp/Ex15&IVS-15 (ins37 b/Ex15&16) are diagnosed by a combination of PCR (or modified PCR) and restriction enzyme digestion. It is important to identify the mutation in genomic DNA for prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection. In the present study, we report a novel missense mutation (R279Q) and a new abnormality in the ASS gene (delta 11 bp/IVS-15). As three missense mutations (R272C, R279Q, and G280R) were found in exon 12, we isolated and sequenced the intron regions surrounding exon 12 to establish a DNA diagnostic test. Although a mutation with a deletion of the first seven bases in exon 16 of mRNA (delta 7 b/Ex16) was found in both Japanese and American patients, the abnormality on the ASS gene was different between the Japanese allele (delta 11 bp/IVS-15) and American allele (IVS-15(-1)). The DNA diagnosis of 47 Japanese alleles with classical citrullinemia showed that the IVS-6(-2) and R304W mutations were found in 49% and 17% of the mutated alleles, respectively. We now have DNA diagnosis systems to detect 14 out of 22 mutations and are performing prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection using genomic DNA on classical citrullinemia.
9143924	Two mutations in the same low-density lipoprotein receptor allele act in synergy to reduce receptor function in heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. Mutations in genes are not necessarily pathogenic. Expression of mutant genes in cells can therefore be required to demonstrate that mutations in fact disturb protein function. This applies especially to missense mutations, which cause an amino acid to be replaced by another amino acid. In the present study of two families with familial hypercholesterolemia in the heterozygous form, we found two mutations in the same allele of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene: a missense Asn543. His mutation (N543H) in exon 11, and an in-frame 9-bp deletion (2393del9) in exon 17. The two mutations were identified in heterozygous FH index patients in whom no other pathogenic mutations were detected by SSCP analysis of the remaining 16 exons and the promoter region. Both mutations cosegregated with hypercholesterolemia within the families. Each of these mutations had little or no effect on receptor function in transfected COS cells, but when both mutations were present simultaneously, receptor function, as assessed by flow cytometric measurement of fluorescent LDL uptake in cells, was reduced by 75%. Immunostainable receptors on the cell surface were decreased by 80% as measured by flow cytometry. The two mutations therefore acted in synergy to affect receptor function, possibly during intracellular receptor transport, since Northern blot analysis suggested that mRNA levels were unaffected. Without screening of the entire coding regions of the gene, the synergistic action of these two LDL receptor mutations would not have been detected.
9143927	Deletions spanning the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene: implications for genotype-phenotype correlations in neurofibromatosis type 1? Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by abnormalities of tissues predominantly derived from the neural crest. Symptoms are highly variable and severity cannot be predicted, even within families. DNA of 84 unrelated patients with NF1, unselected for clinical features or severity, were screened with intragenic polymorphic repeat markers and by Southern analysis with cDNA probes. Deletions of the entire gene were detected in five patients from four unrelated families. Their phenotype resembled that of five previously reported patients with deletions, including intellectual impairment and dysmorphic features, but without an excessive number of dermal neurofibromas. This report supports the hypothesis that large deletions spanning the entire NF1 gene may lead to a specific phenotype.
9222768	Novel mutation (A141D) in exon 4 of the CFTR gene identified in an Algerian patient.
9259194	Rapid characterization of the variable length polythymidine tract in the cystic fibrosis (CFTR) gene: association of the 5T allele with selected CFTR mutations and its incidence in atypical sinopulmonary disease. The CFTR intron 8 variable length polythymidine tract modulates the cystic fibrosis (CF) phenotype associated with the mutation R117H. To explore whether other mutations reside on multiple intron 8 backgrounds with discernible impacts on phenotype, we developed an allele-specific PCR assay to characterize this locus. Our approach types samples rapidly without the use or radioisotopes. Polythymidine alleles were identified for mutations either associated with a wide range of clinical phenotypes (R117H, R347P, G85E, D1152H, R334W, 2789 + 5 G > A, 3849 + 10kb C > T), and/or located at hypermutable CpG loci (R117H, 3845 + 10kb C > T, R553X, R334W, S945L and R75Q). R117H was detected in cis with each of three alleles (5T, 7T, 9T) at the intron 8 locus. The novel R117H-9T association was detected in a 10-month African-American male with borderline-to-mildly elevated sweat chloride values (approximately 50-66 mEq/L). All other mutations studied were associated with 7T except 3849 + 10kb C > T, which was detected on both 7T and 9T backgrounds, but not 5T. Three individuals with a delta F508/3849 + 10kb C > T genotype were 9T,9T and had pancreatic sufficiency and normal sweat chloride values, whereas 15 others who carried 3849 + 10kb C > T on a 7T background had variable pancreatic function (sufficient, n = 12, insufficient, n = 3), and variable sweat chloride values (normal, n = 12, elevated, n = 3). Surprisingly, when not associated with known CFTR mutations, 5T was detected with elevated frequency among individuals with sinopulmonary disease of ill-defined etiology, but with some characteristics of variant CF. In summary, the 5T allele was not found in cis with CF-causing mutations besides R117H, but an elevated 5T allele frequency in variant CF patients suggests 5T may be associated with disease in some situations.
9259197	Geographic distribution and regional origin of 272 cystic fibrosis mutations in European populations. The Biomed CF Mutation Analysis Consortium. The geographic distribution of 272 cystic fibrosis (CF) mutations has been studied by assessing the origin of 27,177 CF chromosomes from 29 European countries and three countries from the North of Africa. The most common mutations are delta F308 (66.8%), G542X (2.6%), N1303K (1.6%), G551D (1.5%) and W1282X (1.0%). The delta F508 mutation has the highest frequency in Denmark (87.2%) and the lowest in Algeria (26.3%). Mutation G542X is common in the Mediterranean countries, with a mean frequency of 6.1%. N1303K is found in most of the western and Mediterranean countries and has the highest frequency in Tunisia (17.2%). The wide distribution of these mutations suggests an ancient origin. G551D is common in north-west and central Europe, but is uncommon in other parts of Europe. W1282X has the highest frequency in Israel (36.2%), being also common in most Mediterranean countries and north Africa. Seventeen mutation have frequencies between 0.1 and 0.9%, 1717-1G-->A (0.83%), R553X (0.75%), R1162X (0.51%), 621 + 1G-->T (0.54%) and 2183AA-->G (0.36%), being the most common ones. Some mutations reach relatively high frequencies in some extended geographic regions, such as mutation 394delTT in northern Europe (1.1-28.8%), R117H in northwestern Europe (1.3-3.0%), R553X in central Europe (1.1-24.4%), 1717-1G-->A in Belgium and France (1.1-5.3%), and 2183AA-->G in Italy and Greece (3.2%). Other mutations are only common in small regions: T338I (Sardinia), 711 + 1G-->T (Tunisia), R1162X (Algeria and north of Italy), 1609delCA (east of Spain), 1811 + 1.6kbA-->G (southeastern Spain), R1066C (Portugal), S549R (Algeria), R334W (Crete), 621 + 1G-->T (Central Greece), 3849 + 10kbC-->T (Israel), 2789 + 5G-->A (south of Greece), 451 + 1G--A (Israel), R347P (south of Bulgaria), 1677delTA (south of Bulgaria and Turkey), G85E (south of Greece), R347H (Turkey), 3905insT (Switzerland), 1078delT (Brittany), 1898 + 1G-->A (Wales), A455E (The Netherlands), delta I507 (Brittany), 3659delC (Sweden) and R560T (northern Ireland). Most of these mutations must have an origin and diffusion in the specific European population subgroup. Overall 55 mutations are common in one or several countries or regions of Europe and 217 mutations are rare with relative frequencies of lower than 1% in any of these regions and countries. This information might facilitate mutation analysis of CF in the different regions of Europe.
9375854	Analysis of multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions in inclusion body myositis. Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a sporadic progressive myopathy, which is morphologically characterized by inflammatory cell infiltrates and rimmed vacuoles in muscle fibers. Mitochondrial changes are regularly present with ragged-red fibers showing deficiency of cytochrome c oxidase. In these muscle fiber segments, there is accumulation of mitochondria with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions. There are different deletions in different muscle fibers. In this study, we have sequenced for the first time the multiple mtDNA deletions in muscle from four patients with IBM. The deletion breakpoints were sequenced from cloned polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified mtDNA fragments. The sequencing was performed directly from the bacterial colonies used for cloning. Of 122 analyzed clones, 33 different deletions were identified. The majority of these have not previously been described. There was a marked predominance of deletion breakpoints in certain regions of mtDNA. These predominant breakpoint regions are similar to those described in other conditions with multiple deletions, such as autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia (adPEO) and normal aging, but different from those described in diseases due to single deletions such as Kearns-Sayre syndrome and sporadic PEO. These findings indicate that common factors are involved in the development of multiple mtDNA deletions in IBM, adPEO, and aging.
9401007	Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with intermediate motor nerve conduction velocities: characterization of 14 Cx32 mutations in 35 families. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease can be inherited either autosomal dominantly or recessively or linked to the X chromosome. X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX) is a sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy in which males have usually more severe clinical symptoms and decreased nerve conduction velocities than do females. CMTX is usually associated with mutations in exon 2 of the connexin 32 (Cx32) gene. DNA from 35 unrelated CMT patients, without the 17p11.2 duplication, but with median nerve conduction between 30 and 40 m/s, were tested for the presence of Cx32 mutations. The entire coding sequence of the Cx32 gene was explored using a rapid nonradioactive technique to detect single-strand conformation polymorphisms (SSCP) on large PCR fragments. Thirteen abnormal SSCP profiles were detected and characterized by sequencing. In addition, systematic sequencing of the entire Cx32 coding region in the remaining index cases revealed another mutation that was not detected by SSCP. A total of 14 mutations were found, five of which were not previously reported. These results demonstrate the high frequency (40%) of mutations in the coding region of the Cx32 gene in CMT patients with intermediate MNCV, without 17p11.2 duplications. Most of these mutations (93%) can be detected by SSCP.
9401011	Mutation of hMSH3 and hMSH6 mismatch repair genes in genetically unstable human colorectal and gastric carcinomas. Mutations within microsatellite sequences, consisting of additions or deletions of repeat units, are known as the replication/repair error positive (RER+) phenotype or micorsatellite instability (MI). Microsatellite instability has been demonstrated in hereditary and sporadic colorectal carcinomas and is usually observed in noncoding regions of genomic DNA. However, relatively few coding region targets of MI have been identified thus far. Using PCR, we amplified regions encompassing (A)8 and (C)8 microsatellite tracts within hMSH3 and hMSH6 from 31 RER+ sporadic colorectal tumors, 8 hereditary colon cancers, 23 RER+ gastric carcinomas, and 32 RER- gastric tumors. Mutations were found in 11 (36%) of 31 sporadic colon carcinomas, 4 (50%) of 8 hereditary colorectal cancers, and 5 (22%) of 23 RER+ gastric carcinomas, but in only 2 (6%) of 32 RER- gastric carcinomas. These frameshift mutations cause premature stop codons downstream that are predicted to abolish normal protein function. Our results and those of others suggest that DNA mismatch repair genes, such as hMSH3 and hMSH6, are targets for the mutagenic activity of upstream mismatch repair gene mutations and that this enhanced genomic instability may accelerate the accumulation of mutations in RER+ tumors.
9452022	Low basal transcripts of the COL2A1 collagen gene from lymphoblasts show alternative splicing of exon 12 in the Kniest form of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia.
9452040	Novel nonsense mutation in exon 15 of the APC gene in one Jewish family.
9452048	Identification of three novel mutations in the CFTR gene, R117P, deltaD192, and 3121-1G-->A in four French patients.
9452051	The molecular basis of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency in French families; report of two novel mutations.
9452055	De novo mutation of the myelin Po gene in Déjérine-Sottas disease (hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type III): two amino acid insertion after Asp 118.
9452089	3' Acceptor splice site mutation in intron 50 leads to mild Duchenne muscular dystrophy phenotype.
9452104	Identification of four novel mutations in the factor VIII gene: three missense mutations (E1875G, G2088S, I2185T) and a 2-bp deletion (1780delTC).
9633815	Spectrum of mutations in the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase gene of tyrosinemia type 1 patients in northwestern Europe and Mediterranean countries. Hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 (HT1) is a rare metabolic disease caused by a deficient activity of the enzyme fumarylacetoacetase (FAH). To investigate the molecular heterogeneity of tyrosinemia, the geographic distribution and the genotype-phenotype relationship, we have analyzed the FAH genotype of 25 HT1 patients. Mutation screening was performed by PCR amplification of exons 1-14 of the FAH gene, followed by SSCP analysis and direct sequencing of the amplified exons. Fourteen different mutations were found, of which seven were novel, viz. three missense mutations (G158D, P261L, F405H), a deletion of three nucleotides causing a deletion of serine (DEL366S) and three splice site mutations: IVS2+1(g-t), IVS6-1(g-c), IVS8-1(g-c). The splice site mutations IVS6-1(g-t) and IVS12+5(g-a) were frequently found in countries around the Mediterranean and northwestern Europe, respectively. No clear correlation between the genotype and the three major HT1 subtypes could be established.
9792408	A frequent TG deletion near the polyadenylation signal of the human HEXB gene: occurrence of an irregular DNA structure and conserved nucleotide sequence motif in the 3' untranslated region. While screening for new mutations in the HEXB gene, which encodes the beta-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase, a TG deletion (deltaTG) was found in the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of the gene, 7 bp upstream from the polyadenylation signal. Examination of DNA samples of 145 unrelated Argentinean individuals from different racial backgrounds showed that the deltaTG allele was present with a frequency of approximately 0.1, compared with the wild-type (WT) allele. The deletion was not associated with infantile or variant forms of Sandhoff disease when present in combination with a deleterious allele. Total Hex and Hex B enzymatic activities measured in individuals heterozygous for deltaTG and a null allele, IVS-2 + 1G-->A (G-->A), were approximately 30% lower than the activities of G-->A/WT individuals. Analysis of the HEXB mRNA from leukocytes of deltaTG/WT individuals by RT-PCR of the 3'UTR showed that the deltaTG allele is present at lower level than the WT allele. By polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, it was determined that a PCR fragment containing the +TG version of the 3'UTR of the HEXB gene had an irregular structure. On inspection of genes containing a TG dinucleotide upstream from the polyadenylation signal we found that this dinucleotide was part of a conserved sequence (TGTTTT) immersed in a A/T-rich region. This sequence arrangement was present in more than 40% analyzed eukaryotic mRNAs, including in the human, mouse and cat HEXB genes. The significance of the TG deletion in reference to Sandhoff disease as well as the possible functional role of the consensus sequence and the DNA structure of the 3'UTR are considered.
9829906	Spectrum of mutations and sequence variants in the FALDH gene in patients with Sjögren-Larsson syndrome. The gene encoding the human fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH) is located on 17p11.2, causing Sjögren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) when mutated. SLS is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a combination of mental retardation, congenital ichthyosis, and spastic di- or tetraplegia. We report here on studies of 16 SLS families from Europe and the Middle East, which resulted in identification of 11 different mutations. The spectrum of mutations characterized in the present study are five nucleotide substitutions resulting in amino acid changes, five frameshift mutations introducing a stop codon, and one in-frame deletion with insertion at the same position. We also observed silent sequence variants in the FALDH gene and a base pair substitution in exon 5 that alters aspartic acid to asparagine, all of which are considered polymorphisms.
10090486	Beta-thalassemia in the German population: mediterranean, Asian and novel mutations. Mutations in brief no.228. Online. The beta-thalassemia mutations of 13 unrelated heterozygous Germans who remained unidentified in a previous study of 40 subjects were investigated at the DNA level. Two Mediterranean, one Asian and three novel mutations (CD6 -G, CDs 108 /112-12nt, CDs 130/131 + GCCT) were identified. Altogether, in 30 of the 35 subjects (86%) in which a mutation in the beta-globin gene was identified, the mutation was of Mediterranean origin. The geographical distribution suggests recent migration from the Mediterranean region as cause of the high proportion of frequent Mediterranean beta-thalassemia mutations in the German population. Our results support the notion that the majority of beta-thalassemia genes in the western and central European population are of Mediterranean origin.
10094553	Identification of twenty-one new mutations in the factor IX gene by SSCP analysis. In this study we have analyzed the factor IX gene from 84 hemophilia B patients of Spanish origin. It included single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of all functional regions of the gene and further sequencing of all fragments showing abnormal migration. In 76 patients (90.4%), it was possible to identify molecular alterations leading to the appearance of the disease. Twenty-one new mutations were identified, including 13 missense mutations, two nonsense mutations, three splice-site mutations, one frameshift deletion, one frameshift insertion, and one non-frameshift deletion. The approach appears to be very suitable for molecular diagnosis of hemophilia B.
10094554	A simple multiplex FRAXA, FRAXE, and FRAXF PCR assay convenient for wide screening programs. FRAXA, FRAXE, and FRAXF are folate-sensitive fragile sites originally discovered in patients with X-linked mental retardation. The FMR1 gene, whose first exon includes the FRAXA site on Xq27.3, accounts for 15-20% of all X-linked forms of mental retardation. Loss of expression of FMR2, a gene adjacent to the FRAXE site on Xq28, is correlated with FRAXE expansion in some mild mentally retarded patients. FRAXF is a fragile site whose expression has not been associated with any pathological phenotype. The fragility in all three sites is caused by expansions of CGG repeats adjacent to hypermethylated CpG islands. The prevalence of FRAXA, FRAXE, and FRAXF remains uncertain because of the lack of a simple and cost-effective test allowing wide screening programs. For the same reason, the real phenotype-genotype correlations in FRAXE and FRAXF are uncertain as well. We have developed a rapid multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay in which hypermethylated CpG islands adjacent to FRAXA, FRAXE, and FRAXF are displayed. The test is very simple and cost-effective, requires only 30 microl of peripheral blood, and can be used for performing diagnoses, postnatal and prenatal, and for screening large groups of control and mentally retarded males and newborn boys.
10094560	Characterization of eleven novel mutations (M45L, R119H, 544delG, G145V, H154Y, C184Y, D289V, 862+5A, 1172delC, R411X, E459K) in the tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) gene in patients with severe hypophosphatasia. Mutations in brief no. 217. Online. Hypophosphatasia is a rare inherited disorder characterized by defective bone mineralization and deficiency of serum and tissue liver/ bone/kidney tissue alkaline phosphatase (L/B/K ALP) activity. We report the characterization of tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) gene mutations in a series of 9 families affected by severe hypophosphatasia. Fourteen distinct mutations were found, 3 of which were previously reported in the North American or Japanese populations. Seven of the 11 new mutations were missense mutations (M45L, R119H, G145V, C184Y and H154Y, D289V, E459K), the four others were 2 single nucleotide deletions (544delG and 1172delC), a mutation affecting donor splice site (862 + 5A) and a nonsense mutation (R411X).
10338100	A single, large deletion accounts for all the beta-globin gene mutations in twenty families from Sabah (North Borneo), Malaysia. Mutation in brief no. 240. Online. Beta-thalassemia major is one of the commonest genetic disorders in South-East Asia. The spectrum of beta-thalassemia mutations in the various ethnic sub-populations on the island of Borneo is unknown. We studied 20 Dusun children from the East Malaysian state of Sabah (North Borneo) with a severe beta-thalassemia major phenotype, using a combination of Southern analysis, polymerase chain reaction analysis and direct sequencing. We found the children to be homozygous for a large deletion, which has a 5' breakpoint at position -4279 from the cap site of the beta-globin gene (HBB) with the 3' breakpoint located in a L1 family of repetitive sequences at an unknown distance from the beta-globin gene. This was similar to a recent finding of a large deletion causing beta-thalassemia first described in unrelated beta-thalassemia heterozygotes of Filipino descent. This report describes the first 20 families with homozygosity of the deletion causing a severe phenotype. It provides the first information on the molecular epidemiology of beta-thalassemia in Sabah. This finding has implications for the population genetics and preventative strategies for beta-thalassemia major for nearly 300 million individuals in South-East Asia.
10408772	Insertion of Alu element responsible for acute intermittent porphyria. In this study, we report a large Finnish family in which an Alu element interferes with the coding region of the porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD) gene resulting in acute intermittent porphyria (AIP). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of exon 5 among patients showed an abnormal band around 350 bp apart from the normal bands. Subcloning and sequencing of the fragment revealed a 333-bp Alu sequence that was directly inserted into exon 5 in antisense orientation. The junction sequences included a 13-bp target site duplication. This Alu cassette belongs to a Ya5 subfamily, one of the youngest and currently most active Alu subfamilies in evolution. The Alu insertion resulted in a dramatically decreased steady-state level of the allelic transcript, as this Alu sequence could not be demonstrated by direct sequencing of the amplified cDNA synthesized from total RNA extracted from the patients' lymphoblast cell lines. A stop codon present in the reading frame causes premature termination of PBGD synthesis. The predicted polypeptide contains 64 of the 361 amino acids of PBGD, followed by 13 amino acids that are not identical to the PBGD polypeptide. To further characterize the consequences of the insertion, the Alu sequence was inserted into exon 5 of the PBGD cDNA and expressed in the eukaryotic COS-1 cell line. The mutated construct expressed no enzyme activity comparable to that of the wild-type PBGD; furthermore, no mutant protein could be detected by Western blot analysis.
10408782	Molecular characterization of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Chile. Mutations in brief no. 243. Online. Both the haplotype distribution and the mutational spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has been defined for the Chilean phenylketonuria (PKU) population. Mutation analysis was performed using a combined approach of screening for common European and Oriental mutations and application of the DGGE scanning method in the remaining uncharacterized alleles. A total of 16 different mutations have been identified, including two novel ones, Q232X and IVS11nt5. The most frequent mutations were IVS10nt-11 and V388M present both in the 13% of the mutant chromosomes. The rest of the mutations are rare. The haplotype association including VNTR and STR alleles, was examined to investigated the origin and distribution of PAH alleles in Chile. Our results are consistent with Southern Europeans as the major source of PAH mutations in Latin America. However, we have also detected mutations from East and Central Europe, such IVS12nt1, R408W and R252W. It is clear that the PKU mutation present in each Latin American country varies with the demographic profile and specific mutation scanning is necessary in each population both for diagnostic and prognostic purposes. The correlation between the genotypes and the phenotypes is consistent with the emerging pattern of mutation severity deduced from previous studies in related populations.
10477429	TP53 mutation and haplotype analysis of two large African American families. Two large apparently unrelated African American families with a high incidence of breast cancer and other tumors characteristic of Li-Fraumeni breast sarcoma cancer family syndrome were studied. Mutation screening revealed that in both families the affected members carried a germline mutation of the TP53 gene at codon 133 (ATG--> ACG, M133T). In order to determine whether an ancestral haplotype was shared by these two families, polymorphic markers within and flanking the TP53 gene were studied. Haplotype analysis using five markers revealed an identical haplotype shared by the two families. Loss of heterozygosity at the TP53 locus in the probands' tumor tissues from each family was observed; in each case, the retained allele carried the common haplotype. The frequency of this haplotype in the general African American population is <0.003. This unique haplotype, combined with the rare TP53 mutation, suggests that these African American families share a common ancestry. This finding suggests that other African Americans may be carriers of this mutation and thus may be at risk of early-onset breast cancer or other cancers characteristic of the Li-Fraumeni breast sarcoma cancer family syndrome. The finding of recurring mutations in African Americans may facilitate carrier screening and identification in this population.
10477438	Racial differences in the frequencies of cardiac beta(1)-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms: analysis of c145A>G and c1165G>C.
10533067	Analysis of both TSC1 and TSC2 for germline mutations in 126 unrelated patients with tuberous sclerosis. Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the development of multiple hamartomas involving many organs. About two-thirds of the cases are sporadic and appear to represent new mutations. With the cloning of two causative genes, TSC1 and TSC2 it is now possible to analyze both genes in TSC patients and identify germline mutations. Here we report the mutational analysis of the entire coding region of both TSC1 and TSC2 genes in 126 unrelated TSC patients, including 40 familial and 86 sporadic cases, by single-stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis followed by direct sequencing. Mutations were identified in a total of 74 (59%) cases, including 16 TSC1 mutations (5 sporadic and 11 familial cases) and 58 TSC2 mutations (42 sporadic and 16 familial cases). Overall, significantly more TSC2 mutations were found in our population, with a relatively equal distribution of mutations between TSC1 and TSC2 among the familial cases, but a marked underrepresentation of TSC1 mutations among the sporadic cases (P = 0.0035, Fisher's exact test). All TSC1 mutations were predicted to be protein truncating. However, in TSC2 13 missense mutations were found, five clustering in the GAP-related domain and three others occurring in exon 16. Upon comparison of clinical manifestations, including the incidence of intellectual disability, we could not find any observable differences between TSC1 and TSC2 patients. Our data help define the distribution and spectrum of mutations associated with the TSC loci and will be useful for both understanding the function of these genes as well as genetic counseling in patients with the disease.
10649495	Glucocerebrosidase gene mutations in patients with type 2 Gaucher disease. Gaucher disease, the most common lysosomal storage disorder, results from the inherited deficiency of the enzyme glucocerebrosidase. Three clinical types are recognized: type 1, non-neuronopathic; type 2, acute neuronopathic; and type 3, subacute neuronopathic. Type 2 Gaucher disease, the rarest type, is progressive and fatal. We have performed molecular analyses of a cohort of 31 patients with type 2 Gaucher disease. The cases studied included fetuses presenting prenatally with hydrops fetalis, infants with the collodion baby phenotype, and infants diagnosed after several months of life. All 62 mutant glucocerebrosidase (GBA) alleles were identified. Thirty-three different mutant alleles were found, including point mutations, splice junction mutations, deletions, fusion alleles and recombinant alleles. Eleven novel mutations were identified in these patients: R131L, H255Q, R285H, S196P, H311R, c.330delA, V398F, F259L, c.533delC, Y304C and A190E. Mutation L444P was found on 25 patient alleles. Southern blots and direct sequencing demonstrated that mutation L444P occurred alone on 9 alleles, with E326K on one allele and as part of a recombinant allele on 15 alleles. There were no homozygotes for point mutation L444P. The recombinant alleles that included L444P resulted from either reciprocal recombination or gene conversion with the nearby glucocerebrosidase pseudogene, and seven different sites of recombination were identified. Homozygosity for a recombinant allele was associated with early lethality. We have also summarized the literature describing mutations associated with type 2 disease, and list 50 different mutations. This report constitutes the most comprehensive molecular study to date of type 2 Gaucher disease, and it demonstrates that there is significant phenotypic and genotypic heterogeneity among patients with type 2 Gaucher disease. Hum Mutat 15:181-188, 2000. Published 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
10737991	Identification of fifteen novel PHEX gene mutations in Finnish patients with hypophosphatemic rickets. We have carried out a mutation screening of the PHEX gene in Finnish patients with hypophosphatemia. A total of 100% (5/5) of the familial HYP patients (X-linked hypophosphatemia) and 93% (14/15) of the sporadic cases were found to carry a mutation in the PHEX gene. We identified 18 mutations, of which 15 were novel. We report also a new polymorphism 46bp upstream of exon 16. Two families were segregating the same nonsense mutation in exon 1 (R20X), but since this mutation has been previously reported in three independent studies, we consider it to be a mutational hotspot rather than a Finnish founder mutation. We did not find PHEX gene mutations in two additional hypophosphatemia families in which the mode of inheritance was other than X-linked dominant. Also, no mutation could be detected in a patient with suspected oncogenic osteomalacia (OHO).
10738001	A novel polymorphism (219G>A) in the transferrin receptor gene.
10738004	A novel mutation (Q239R) identified in a Taiwan Chinese patient with type VI mucopolysaccharidosis (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome).
10790217	Detection of point mutations of BCL10 gene in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues: report of 46 cases. BCL10 was found to have truncated mutations at a high frequency in MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) B cell lymphomas. We examined the mutations of BCL10 gene in human primary liver cancer using non-isotopic PCR-SSCP. Three exons were examined in both cancer and non-HCC adjacent liver tissues. For each exon, six PCR products with abnormal bands were sequenced to verify those mutations. 56.5% samples were revealed a C to G mutation at position 5744 (g5744C>G) of the first exon of BCL10 gene; 54.3% samples were revealed a T deletion mutation at position 11311 (g11311delT) of the second exon of BCL10 gene; 45.7% samples were revealed a C to T mutation at position 14116 (g14116C>T) of the third exon of BCL10 gene. Similar mutation types were found in tumor-adjacent tissues at a lower frequency. The single base changes result in a truncated BCL10 protein expression. Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level, the tumor size had no significant relationship with BCL10 mutation.
10790218	Analysis of the human KCNH2(HERG) gene: identification and characterization of a novel mutation Y667X associated with long QT syndrome and a non-pathological 9 bp insertion. Long QT (LQT) syndrome is a potentially life-threatening disorder, characterized by a distinct cardiac arrhythmia known as torsades de pointes. Mutations within a number of genes linked to the familial form, including that coding for a cardiac potassium channel called KCNH2 (HERG), have been described based on the characterized genomic organization. A standardized method was developed to screen the entire gene for gene variants. We report a single base pair substitution, introducing a premature STOP codon at codon 667 of the gene in a healthy individual with an extended QTc interval (460 msec). In vitro expression of the codon Y667X variant in Xenopus oocyte suggests that the autosomal dominant variant does not function in a dominant/negative manner and cannot co-assemble to form a channel, resulting in a reduction of the KCNH2 current, and an extension of the QT interval. This indicates that pathogenic LQT gene variants exist in the apparently normal population, the prognosis and clinical consequences of which remain to be determined. The assays described should facilitate future studies into this area.
10862097	Identification of 3 novel mutations (Y4236X, Q3820X, 11745+2 ins3) in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease 1 gene (PKD1).
10874330	A novel mutation (1320InsT) identified in two Argentine families with variegate porphyria.
11058905	Six novel MEN1 gene mutations in sporadic parathyroid tumors. We report nine mutations of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) gene in sporadic parathyroid adenomas. Six of them have not previously been described: E60X, P32R, 261delA, 934+2T-->G, S443P, and 1593insC. The tissue samples were initially submitted to LOH analysis at 11q13 followed by SSCP screening of LOH-positive samples. Mutations were identified by direct sequencing and subcloning. Three (E60X, P32R, and 261delA) were in exon 2, one (934+2bp) in the splice junction of exon 5, one (S443P) in exon 9, and one (1593insC) in exon 10. The 3 mutations in exon 2 were associated with loss and/or creation of a restriction site. The corresponding germline sequence of the MEN1 gene was normal. Most mutations would likely result in a nonfunctional menin protein, and therefore in the loss of a tumor suppressor protein.
11102997	A de novo adrenoleukodystrophy gene (ABCD1) mutation S636I without detectable ABCD1 protein and a R104C mutation with normal amounts of protein from an Austrian patient collective.
11139239	Jagged1 mutations in alagille syndrome. We have summarized data on 233 Alagille syndrome patients reported with mutations in Jagged1 (JAG1). This data has been published by seven different laboratories in Europe, the United States, Australia, and Japan. Mutations have been demonstrated in 60-75% of patients with a clinically confirmed diagnosis of Alagille syndrome. Total gene deletions have been reported in 3-7% of patients, and the remainder have intragenic mutations. Seventy two percent (168/233) of the reported mutations lead to frameshifts that cause a premature termination codon. These mutations will either lead to a prematurely truncated protein, or alternatively, nonsense mediated decay might lead to lack of a product from that allele. Twenty three unique missense mutations were identified (13% of mutations). These were clustered in conserved regions at the 5' end of the gene, or in the EGF repeats. Splicing consensus sequence changes were identified in 15% of patients. A high frequency of de novo mutations (60-70%) has been reported. The spectrum of mutations identified is consistent with haploinsufficiency for JAG1 being a mechanism for Alagille syndrome.
11139269	A novel polymorphism (-88 C>A) in the 5' UTR of the p53R2 gene.
11180609	Three novel mutations (P760L, L1305P, Q1351Stop) causing Wilson disease.
11295840	Identification of a novel de novo mutation (G373D) in the alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA) in a patient affected with Fabry disease.
11317353	Variable expressivity and mutation databases: The androgen receptor gene mutations database. For over 50 years genetics has presumed that variations in phenotypic expression have, for the most part, been the result of alterations in genotype. The importance and value of mutation databases has been based on the premise that the same gene or allelic variation in a specific gene that has been proven to determine a specific phenotype, will always produce the same phenotype. However, recent evidence has shown that so called "simple" Mendelian disorders or monogenic traits are often far from simple, exhibiting phenotypic variation (variable expressivity) that cannot be explained solely by a gene or allelic alteration. The AR gene mutations database now lists 25 cases where different degrees of androgen insensitivity are caused by identical mutations in the androgen receptor gene. In five of these cases the phenotypic variability is due to somatic mosaicism, that is, somatic mutations that occur in only certain cells of androgen-sensitive tissue. Recently, a number of other cases of variable expressivity have also been linked to somatic mosaicism. The impact of variable expressivity due to somatic mutations and mosaicism on mutation databases is discussed. In particular, the effect of an organism exhibiting genetic heterogeneity within its tissues, and the possibility of an organism's genotype changing over its lifetime, are considered to have important implications for mutation databases in the future.
11385711	The R71G BRCA1 is a founder Spanish mutation and leads to aberrant splicing of the transcript. In a BRCA1 screening in familial breast cancer carried out in different centres in Spain, France, and United Kingdom, a missense mutation 330A>G which results in a Arg to Gly change at codon 71 (R71G) was independently identified in 6 families, all of them with Spanish ancestors. This residue coincides with the -2 position of the exon 5 donor splice site. We further investigated the effect of this base substitution on the splicing of BRCA1 mRNA. The sequence analysis of the cDNA indicated that 22 bp of exon 5 were deleted, creating with the first bases of exon 6 a termination codon at position 64, which results in a truncated protein. The BRCA1 haplotype of the R71G carrier patients and Spanish controls was analysed by use of six microsatellites located within or near BRCA1. Our results are consistent with the possibility that these families shared a common ancestry with BRCA1 R71G being a founder mutation of Spanish origin.
11438995	Biosensor technology for real-time detection of the cystic fibrosis W1282X mutation in CFTR. In the present paper, biospecific interaction analysis (BIA) was performed using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and biosensor technologies to detect the Trp1282Ter mutation (W1282X) of the cystic fibrosis (CF) transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. We first immobilized on a SA5 sensor chip a single-stranded biotinylated oligonucleotide containing the sequence involved in this mutation, and the efficiency of hybridization of oligonucleotide probes differing in length was determined. Second, we immobilized on different SA5 sensor chips biotinylated polymerase-chain reaction (PCR) products from a normal subject as well as from heterozygous and homozygous W1282X samples. The results obtained show that both allele-specific 10- and 12-mer oligonucleotides are suitable probes to detect W1282X mutations of the cystic fibrosis gene under standard BIA experimental conditions. During the association phase performed at 25 degrees C, discrimination between mismatched and full matched hybrids was readily and reproducibly observed by using the 10-mer W1282X probes. By contrast, when the 12-mer DNA probes were employed, discrimination between mismatched and full matched hybrids was observed during the dissociation phase. Taken together, the results presented suggest that BIA is an easy, speedy, and automatable approach to detect point mutations leading to cystic fibrosis. By this procedure, it is possible to perform real-time monitoring of hybridization between target single stranded PCR products obtained by using as substrates DNA isolated from normal or heterozygous subjects, and homozygous W1282X CF samples and oligonucleotide probes, therefore enabling a one-step, non-radioactive protocol to perform diagnosis.
11524732	High incidence of N and K-Ras activating mutations in multiple myeloma and primary plasma cell leukemia at diagnosis. Using allele-specific amplification method (ARMS), a highly sensitive one-stage allele-specific PCR, we have evaluated the incidence of NRAS and KRAS2 activating mutations (codons 12, 13, and 61) in 62 patients with either monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) or multiple myeloma (MM), primary plasma-cell leukemia (P-PCL), and also in human myeloma cell lines (HMCL). NRAS and/or KRAS2 mutations were found in 54.5% of MM at diagnosis (but in 81% at the time of relapse), in 50% of P-PCL, and in 50% of 16 HMCL. In contrast, the occurrence of such mutations was very low in MGUS and indolent MM (12.50%). Of note, KRAS2 mutations were always more frequent than NRAS. The validity of the technique was assessed by direct sequencing of cell lines and of some patients. Multiple mutations found in two patients were confirmed by subcloning exon PCR amplification products, testing clones with our method, and sequencing them. Thus, these early mutations could play a major role in the oncogenesis of MM and P-PCL.
11524734	Identification of seven novel mutations including the first two genomic rearrangements in SLC26A3 mutated in congenital chloride diarrhea. Congenital chloride diarrhea (CLD) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by defective intestinal electrolyte absorption, resulting in voluminous osmotic diarrhea with high chloride content. A variety of mutations in the solute carrier family 26, member 3 gene (SLC26A3, previously known as CLD or DRA) are responsible for the disease. Since the identification of the SLC26A3 gene and the determination of its genomic structure, altogether three founder and 17 private mutations have been characterized within miscellaneous ethnic groups. We screened for mutations in seven unrelated families with CLD. The diagnoses were confirmed by fecal chloride measurements. The combined PCR-SSCP and sequencing analyses revealed altogether seven novel mutations including two missense mutations (S206P, D468V), two splicing defects (IVS12-1G>C, IVS13-2delA), one nonsense mutation (Q436X), one insertion/deletion mutation (2104-2105delGGins29-bp), and an intragenic deletion of SLC26A3 exons 7 and 8. Two previously identified mutations were also found. This is the first report of rearrangement mutations in SLC26A3. Molecular features predisposing SLC26A3 for the two rearrangements may include repetitive elements and palindromic-like sequences. The increasingly wide diversity of SLC26A3 mutations suggests that mutations in the SLC26A3 gene may not be rare events.
11668643	Seven novel mutations in the ORNT1 gene (SLC25A15) in patients with hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, and homocitrullinuria syndrome. Eight unrelated Italian patients with the hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, and homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome were analyzed for mutations in the ORNT1 gene. Seven novel mutations were identified (Q89X, G27R, G190D, R275Q, c.861insG, c.164insA, and IVS5+1G-->A). Other previously described variants were a heterozygous deletion of a phenylalanine residue (F188del) in one allele and the R179X in two. The G27R mutation was carried by two patients. Analyses of ORNT1 mRNA in four patients showed that mutant alleles were stable and of the predicted size. The current study expands the spectrum of mutations in ORNT1 gene.
11793474	Integrating mutation data and structural analysis of the TP53 tumor-suppressor protein. TP53 encodes p53, which is a nuclear phosphoprotein with cancer-inhibiting properties. In response to DNA damage, p53 is activated and mediates a set of antiproliferative responses including cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. Mutations in the TP53 gene are associated with more than 50% of human cancers, and 90% of these affect p53-DNA interactions, resulting in a partial or complete loss of transactivation functions. These mutations affect the structural integrity and/or p53-DNA interactions, leading to the partial or complete loss of the protein's function. We report here the results of a systematic automated analysis of the effects of p53 mutations on the structure of the core domain of the protein. We found that 304 of the 882 (34.4%) distinct mutations reported in the core domain can be explained in structural terms by their predicted effects on protein folding or on protein-DNA contacts. The proportion of "explained" mutations increased to 55.6% when substitutions of evolutionary conserved amino acids were included. The automated method of structural analysis developed here may be applied to other frequently mutated gene mutations such as dystrophin, BRCA1, and G6PD.
11793480	BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in Russian familial breast cancer. We have screened index cases from 25 Russian breast/ovarian cancer families for germ-line mutations in all coding exons of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, using multiplex heteroduplex analysis. In addition we tested 22 patients with breast cancer diagnosed before age 40 without family history and 6 patients with bilateral breast cancer. The frequency of families with germline mutations in BRCA was 16% (4/25). One BRCA1 mutation, 5382insC, was found in three families. The results of present study, and those of a separate study of 19 breast-ovarian cancer families, suggest that BRCA1 5382insC is a founder mutation in the Russian population. Three BRCA2 mutations were found in patients with breast cancer without family history: two in young patients and one in patients with bilateral breast cancer. Four novel BRCA2 mutations were identified: three frameshift (695insT, 1528del4, 9318del4) and one nonsense (S1099X).
11968082	GeneTests-GeneClinics: genetic testing information for a growing audience. The development and usage of two companion NIH-funded genetic testing information databases, GeneTests (www.genetests.org) and GeneClinics (www.geneclinics.org), now merged into one web site, reflect the steadily increasing use of genetic testing and the expanding audience for genetic testing information. Established in 1993 as Helix, a genetics laboratory directory of approximately 110 listings, GeneTests has grown into a database of over 900 tests for inherited diseases, a directory of over 500 international laboratories, a directory of over 1,000 U.S. and international genetics clinics, and a resource for educational/teaching materials and reports of summary genetic test data. GeneClinics, founded in 1997 as an expert-authored, peer-reviewed, disease-specific knowledge base relating genetic testing to patient care, has grown steadily, now containing over 130 expert-authored, peer-reviewed full-text entries relating genetic testing information to diagnosis, management, and genetic counseling of specific inherited diseases. In spring 2001 the two databases were merged and in October 2001 the two web sites were merged for the purpose of seamless navigation into the GeneTests-GeneClinics site (www.genetests.org or www.geneclinics.org); the GeneClinics knowledge base was renamed "GeneReviews" to avoid confusion with the U.S. and international clinic directories. As genetic testing has moved steadily out of research venues and into routine medical practice, the user audience for these databases has become international and expansive and includes healthcare providers, patients, educators, policy makers, and the media. The use of these combined resources has grown to approximately 3,200 visits/day.
11968091	GJB2 mutations in Iranians with autosomal recessive non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss. Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) is an extremely common disorder. About 70% of HHL is non-syndromic, with autosomal recessive forms accounting for approximately 85% of the genetic load. Although very heterogeneous, the most common cause of HHL in many different world populations is mutations of GJB2, a gene that encodes the gap junction protein connexin 26 (Cx26). This study investigates the contribution of GJB2 to the autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness (ARNSD) load in the Iranian population. One hundred sixty eight persons from 83 families were studied. GJB2-related deafness was diagnosed in 9 families (4, 35delG homozygotes; 3, 35delG compound heterozygotes; 1, W24X homozygote; 1, non-35delG compound heterozygote). The carrier frequency of the 35delG allele in this population was approximately 1% (1/83). Because the relative frequency of Cx26 mutations is much less than in the other populations, it is possible that mutations in other genes play a major role in ARNSD in Iran.
12204007	Identification of mutations of Bruton's tyrosine kinase gene (BTK) in Brazilian patients with X-linked agammaglobulinemia. Mutations in the Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) gene are responsible for X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), which is characterized by recurrent bacterial infections, profound hypogammaglobulinemia, and decreased numbers of mature B cells in the peripheral blood. We evaluated 17 male Brazilian patients from 13 unrelated families who showed markedly reduced numbers of blood B cells and hypogammaglobulinemia. BTK gene analysis detected mutations in 10 of the 13 presumed XLA families. Seven mutations (Q196X, G613D, R28L, 251-273del, Q234X, H364P, and R13X) had been reported previously, whereas the remaining three mutations (M501T, IVS15+1G>C, and IVS14+1G>A) were novel. Mutation IVS15+1G>C occurred in a splice donor site and caused exons 15 and 16 to be skipped, and IVS14+1G>A might cause exon 14 to be skipped. Flow cytometry revealed deficient expression of BTK protein in 10 of the 13 families. This is the first report of the diagnosis of XLA by analysis of mutations of the BTK gene in Brazilian patients.
12325018	rSNP_Guide: an integrated database-tools system for studying SNPs and site-directed mutations in transcription factor binding sites. Since the human genome was sequenced in draft, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis has become one of the keynote fields of bioinformatics. We have developed an integrated database-tools system, rSNP_Guide (http://wwwmgs.bionet.nsc.ru/mgs/systems/rsnp/), devoted to prediction of transcription factor (TF) binding sites, alterations of which could be associated with disease phenotype. By inputting data on alterations in DNA sequence and in DNA binding pattern of an unknown TF, rSNP_Guide searches for a known TF with alterations in the recognition score calculated on the basis of TF site's sequence and consistent with the input alterations in DNA binding to the unknown TF. Our system has been tested on many relationships between known TF sites and diseases, as well as on site-directed mutagenesis data. Experimental verification of rSNP_Guide system was made on functionally important SNPs in human TDO2and mouse K-ras genes. Additional examples of analysis are reported involving variants in the human gammaA-globin (HBG1), hsp70(HSPA1A), and Factor IX (F9) gene promoters.
12402331	Novel PEX1 mutations and genotype-phenotype correlations in Australasian peroxisome biogenesis disorder patients. The peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs) are a group of neuronal migration/neurodegenerative disorders that arise from defects in PEX genes. A major subgroup of the PBDs includes Zellweger syndrome (ZS), neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD), and infantile Refsum disease (IRD). These three disorders represent a clinical continuum with Zellweger syndrome the most severe. Mutations in the PEX1 gene, which encodes a protein of the AAA ATPase family involved in peroxisome matrix protein import, account for the genetic defect in more than half of the patients in this PBD subgroup. We report here on the results of PEX1 mutation detection in an Australasian cohort of PEX1-deficient PBD patients. This screen has identified five novel mutations, including nonsense mutations in exons 14 and 19 and single nucleotide deletions in exons 5 and 18. Significantly, the allele carrying the exon 18 frameshift mutation is present at moderately high frequency (approx. 10%) in this patient cohort. The fifth mutation is a missense mutation (R798G) that attenuates, but does not abolish PEX1 function. We have evaluated the cellular impact of these novel mutations, along with that of the two most common PEX1 mutations (c.2097-2098insT and G843D), in PBD patients by determining the levels of PEX1 mRNA, PEX1 protein, and peroxisome protein import. The findings are consistent with a close correlation between cellular phenotype, disease severity, and PEX1 genotype.
12402345	Molecular studies in mutase-deficient (MUT) methylmalonic aciduria: identification of five novel mutations. Mutase-deficient (MUT) methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of organic acid metabolism, resulting from a functional defect in the nuclear encoded mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MCM) (EC.5.4.99.2). The enzyme requires 5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin as a cofactor. Isolated MMA results from either apoenzyme or cofactor defects, and is classified into several genotypic classes and complementation groups. These are designated mut(-) or mut(0) (together termed mut), depending on minimal or no apoenzyme activity respectively and cobalamin A or B (cbl A/B) for cofactor defects. To date various studies have identified over 53 disease-causing mutations from patients with mut(0/-) MMA. These are predominantly missense/nonsense nucleotide substitutions. In this study, we report the genotype analysis on 7 patients diagnosed with mut MMA. Five novel mutations were identified (R403stop, 497delG, P615T, 208delG and R467stop) and one novel polymorphism (c712A->G). The previously reported R228Q mutation was found in one patient, who is a compound heterozygote for this mutation and the R467stop mutation. A recently reported N219Y mutation was found in one patient. The 497delG mutation was detected as a homozygous deletion. The remaining mutations were observed in compound heterozygotes, with the second mutation yet to be identified. Many of the unidentified mutations may occur within the promotor or intronic regions.
12442272	D90A-SOD1 mediated amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a single founder for all cases with evidence for a Cis-acting disease modifier in the recessive haplotype. More than 100 different heterozygous mutations in copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) have been found in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease. Uniquely, D90A-SOD1 has been identified in recessive, dominant and apparently sporadic pedigrees. The phenotype of homozygotes is stereotyped with an extended survival, whereas that of affected heterozygotes varies. The frequency of D90A-SOD1 is 50 times higher in Scandinavia (2.5%) than elsewhere, though ALS prevalence is not raised there. Our earlier study indicated separate founders for recessive and dominant/sporadic ALS and we proposed a disease-modifying factor linked to the recessive mutation. Here we have doubled our sample set and employed novel markers to characterise the mutation's origin and localise any modifying factor. Linkage disequilibrium analysis indicates that D90A homozygotes and heterozygotes share a rare haplotype and are all descended from a single ancient founder (alpha 0.974) c.895 generations ago. Homozygotes arose subsequently only c.63 generations ago (alpha 0.878). Recombination has reduced the region shared by recessive kindreds to 97-265 kb around SOD1, excluding all neighbouring genes. We propose that a cis-acting regulatory polymorphism has arisen close to D90A-SOD1 in the recessive founder, which decreases ALS susceptibility in heterozygotes and slows disease progression.
12442283	Novel mutations in the MYOC/GLC1A gene in a large group of glaucoma patients. Mutations at the myocilin (MYOC) gene within the GLC1A locus have been revealed in 2-4% of patients suffering primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) worldwide. In our ongoing glaucoma study six hundred eighty two persons have been screened for MYOC mutations. The first group consisted of 453 patients from a long-term clinical study diagnosed either with juvenile OAG (JOAG), POAG, ocular hypertension (OHT) or normal tension glaucoma (NTG) plus 22 cases of secondary glaucoma. This group, and additional 83 healthy controls, is part of a long term study with repeated clinical examinations at the University of Erlangen-Nurnberg. An additional sample of 124 glaucoma patients or at risk persons referred from other sources were included in the mutation screening. Five novel mutations, namely Gly434Ser, Asn450Asp, Val251Ala, Ile345Met and Ser393Asn, could be identified as cause of preperimetric POAG, JOAG, normal tension POAG and POAG. Myocilin mutations were identified similar with previous reports with other ethnic populations at the rate of 11/341 (3.2%) probands.
12497643	Splice mutations in the p53 gene: case report and review of the literature. Splice mutations in the p53 gene (TP53) are described as rare events that occur at a frequency of less than 1%. Using a functional assay based on the transcriptional activity of p53 and using RNA as starting material, we describe here a p53 splice mutation that could not be detected by genomic sequencing. This lack of detection is due to a deletion of the region complementary to primers commonly used for amplification. Reviewing the literature, we show that p53 splice mutations have been certainly underestimated and that careful strategy should be used for a complete mutational analysis of the p53 gene. Furthermore, some p53 gene mutations described as "neutral" due to the absence of any amino-acid change are truly deleterious, as they affect gene splicing.
12552556	Clinical and molecular study in congenital muscular dystrophy with partial laminin alpha 2 (LAMA2) deficiency. Complete laminin alpha2 (LAMA2) deficiency causes approximately half of congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD) cases. Many loss-of-function mutations have been reported in these severe, neonatal-onset patients, but only single missense mutations have been found in milder CMD with partial laminin alpha2 deficiency. Here, we studied nine patients diagnosed with CMD who showed abnormal white-matter signal at brain MRI and partial deficiency of laminin alpha2 on immunofluorescence of muscle biopsy. We screened the entire 9.5 kb laminin alpha2 mRNA from patient muscle biopsy by direct capillary automated sequencing, single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP), or denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) of overlapping RT-PCR products followed by direct sequencing of heteroduplexes. We identified laminin alpha2 sequence changes in six of nine CMD patients. Each of the gene changes identified, except one, was novel, including three missense changes and two splice-site mutations. The finding of partial laminin alpha2 deficiency by immunostaining is not specific for laminin alpha2 gene mutation carriers, with only two patients (22%) showing clear causative mutations, and an additional three patients (33%) showing possible mutations. The clinical presentation and disease progression was homogeneous in the laminin alpha2-mutation positive and negative CMD patients.
12552571	Functional analysis of LKB1/STK11 mutants and two aberrant isoforms found in Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome patients. Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS) is thought to be caused by mutations occurring in the widely expressed serine/threonine protein kinase named LKB1/STK11. Recent work has led to the identification of four mutants (R304W, I177N, K175-D176del, L263fsX286) and two novel aberrant LKB1/STK11 cDNA isoforms (r291-464del, r485-1283del) in a group of PJS Italian patients. Three of the four mutations only change 1 or 2 amino acids in the LKB1/STK11 catalytic domain. Here we demonstrate that all six LKB1/STK11 variants analysed are completely inactive in vitro as they were unable to autophosphorylate at Thr336, the major LKB1/STK11 autophosphorylation site, and to phosphorylate the p53 tumour suppressor protein. We also show that 5 out of the 6 variants are entirely localised in the nucleus in contrast to the wild type LKB1/STK11, which is detected in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. Finally we demonstrate that all 6 LKB1/STK11 variants, in contrast to wild type LKB1/STK11, are unable to suppress the growth of melanoma G361 cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate that the LKB1 mutations investigated in this study lead to the loss of serine/threonine kinase activity and are therefore likely to be the primary cause of PJS development in the patients that they were isolated from.
12619118	Germline TP53 mutations and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. There are now reports of nearly 250 independent germline TP53 (p53) mutations in over 100 publications. Such mutations are typically associated with Li-Fraumeni or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome, although many have been identified in cohorts of patients with tumors considered to be typical of LFS. In general, the spectrum of mutations that has been detected in the germline reflects that found in tumors, although there are some notable exceptions in certain tumor types. Detailed knowledge of the pedigrees allows a comprehensive analysis of genotype-phenotype correlations and an understanding of the tumors that are associated with germline TP53 mutations. This review will discuss the spectrum of mutations and the methods for mutation detection, the tumors associated with inheritance of a germline mutation, and some of the ethical and clinical problems in patients with a germline TP53 mutation.
12655559	Gene structure of human carbamylphosphate synthetase 1 and novel mutations in patients with neonatal onset. Carbamylphosphate synthetase 1 (E.C. 6.3.4.16) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of the urea cycle that can result in severe neonatal hyperammonemia. Since the genomic structure of the CPS1 gene was not yet elucidated, mutation detection was performed by analysis of transcripts in the past. Here, we present the entire DNA sequence of the human CPS1 gene including all exon-intron boundaries. Moreover, mutation analysis was performed in six patients leading to the detection of 9 novel mutations including the missense mutations c.2528T>C and c.2623A>G, the nonsense mutations c.712C>T and c.2115ins35bp, the splice site mutations c.1263+5G>C, c.3558+1G>C and c.4101+2T>C, and a small deletion c.3036_3038delGGT. The mutations c.2528T>C and c.2623A>G were identified on a double mutated allele. New data on the genomic structure of the CPS1 gene provided in this study are useful to characterize the heterogenous molecular basis of the disease in patients deficient for carbamylphosphate 1 deficiency.
12673796	Detection of hotspot mutations and polymorphisms using an enhanced PCR-RFLP approach. Ethidium gel-based PCR-RFLP is widely used, and is perhaps the simplest method for detection of known mutations in cancer-related genes and for genotyping a wide range of other human diseases. However, its application is limited by the fact that it can only detect mutant alleles that are present in more than 5-10% of wild-type alleles. Here we present a method that allows a 1-2 order enhancement in the sensitivity of the widely used PCR-RFLP without substantially increasing the effort and cost associated with it. This method is a modification to our previously reported amplification via primer ligation at the mutation (APRIL-ATM) method, which utilizes ligation of a primer at a restriction site formed by a mutation, followed by a ligation-mediated PCR amplification which amplifies only the mutation-containing DNA molecules. By combining this method with the artificial introduction of restriction sites during PCR, we demonstrate that assays can be designed and validated for detecting hot-spot mutations in codons 273, 158, and 248 of the TP53 gene (p53) and potentially for most mutations of interest. This approach is validated by using samples where the mutation was artificially introduced at these p53 positions. The increased sensitivity offered by the method further allows us to rapidly screen for low frequency polymorphisms in pooled DNA samples. The frequency of an MSH2 missense polymorphism (965G>A) was quantified in pooled genomic DNA samples from 205 and 221 U.S. and Polish colorectal cancer patients, respectively, and an equal number of ethnicity-matched controls. The data revealed a 3-5% prevalence of this polymorphism in the patient and the control populations. Individual sequencing of all 852 patient samples demonstrated an excellent agreement among the two independent approaches. The present enhanced PCR-RFLP reduces the effort involved in high throughput polymorphism studies and promises to find applications in genotyping and association studies involving low frequency polymorphisms and mutations.
12673802	Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) due to a small duplication in the PABPN1 gene. Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is a late onset autosomal dominant muscle disorder. The OPMD-locus has been mapped to chromosome 14q11.2-q13. The polyadenylate binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1; PABP2) gene has been identified as the mutated gene. The mutation consists of a short meiotically stable trinucleotide repeat in the first exon of PABPN1 gene. We have investigated Dutch OPMD patients from four unrelated families and identified a new mutation in two of the four families. Instead of a repeat expansion we found a duplication in the first exon of the PABPN1 gene (c.27_28ins12, p.11_12insAAAA). The identification of this new mutation supports the theory of unequal crossing-over as molecular mechanism causing the mutation in the PABPN1 gene responsible for OPMD, and not the slippage model.
12872253	Mutation screening of the N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) in patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease. In a previous study, we have shown that N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1), classified in databases as a tumor suppressor and heavy metal-response protein, is mutated in hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy Lom (HMSNL), a severe autosomal recessive form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease. The private founder mutation R148X, causing HMSNL in patients of Romani ethnicity, has so far remained the only molecular defect linking NDRG1 to a specific disease phenotype. Here we report the first study aiming to assess the overall contribution of this gene to the pathogenesis of peripheral neuropathies, in cases where the most common causes of CMT disease have been excluded. Sequence analysis of NDRG1 in 104 CMT patients of diverse ethnicity identified one novel disease-causing mutation, IVS8-1G>A (g.2290787G>A), which affects the splice-acceptor site of IVS8 and results in the skipping of exon 9. The phenotype of the IVS8-1G>A homozygote was very closely related to that of HMSNL patients. In addition, we have detected homozygosity for the known R148X mutation in two affected individuals. Mutations in NDRG1 thus accounted for 2.88% of our overall group of patients, and for 4.68% of cases with demyelinating neuropathies. No other variants were identified in the coding sequence, whereas 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms were observed in the introns. Hum Mutat 22:129-135, 2003.
12938095	Molecular analysis in Fabry disease in Spain: fifteen novel GLA mutations and identification of a homozygous female. Fabry disease, an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA). Here we report molecular studies in 22 unrelated Spanish patients with Fabry disease ( 20 males and two females). Fifteen novel mutations were identified. In addition 7 previously described mutations and two previously reported polymorphisms were detected. The 15 novel mutations comprise: eight missense E48K (c.142G>A), W81S (c.242G>C), D170H (c.508G>C), W226C (c.678G>T), Q279R (c.836A>G), C382Y (c.1145G>A), I407K (c.1220T>A), L414S (c.1241T>C); one nonsense W95X (c.284G>A); one insertion Y216fsX15 (c.646_647insT); two small deletions G346fsX1 (c.1037delG), K426fsX23 (c.1277_1278delAA); one gross deletion comprising exons 5, 6, 7; one complex mutation (insertion and deletion) A368fsX24 (c.1102delGinsTTATAC), and one splice-site mutation IVS4+1G>A (c.639+1G>A). One of the females was found homozygous for Q279R mutation and she presented with the classic phenotype since the age of 8 years, this case extending into women the severe phenotype observed in classically affected males. Mutation analysis provided precise identification for 30 heterozygotes among female relatives and detection of a de novo mutation. The molecular studies on Spanish Fabry patients here reported further contribute to the identification of new mutations in this disease, and allow reliable detection of heterozygotes which has consequences for genetic counselling and for treatment.
14517964	BUB1 infrequently mutated in human breast carcinomas. The BUB1 gene is a key player in the mitotic spindle checkpoint machinery that monitors proper segregation of sister chromatides during mitosis. It has been suggested that mutations in BUB1 may disrupt the spindle checkpoint and thereby cause chromosomal instability, which is a hallmark of solid tumors including those from the breast. From a series of breast carcinomas we selected 20 cases with genomic instability, as scored by Comparative Genome Hybridization (CGH), and without somatic TP53 (p53) mutations, and sequenced the entire coding region of the BUB1 gene. Two different constitutional sequence variants were found; a base substitution in exon 5, c.481G>A (CAG>CAA, a synonymous change encoding Gln144) in two samples, and a base substitution 8 bp upstream of exon 10, c.1007-8T>C in two other samples. No somatic mutations were detected. These results indicate that genomic instability scored as copy number alterations by CGH in TP53 wild type breast carcinomas is not caused by somatic mutations in the BUB1 gene.
14695528	Subtelomeric deletions detected in patients with idiopathic mental retardation using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Subtelomeric rearrangements are responsible for 5% to 10% of cases of unexplained mental retardation. Despite their clinical relevance, methods to screen for these cytogenetically invisible abnormalities on a routine base are scarce. We screened patients with idiopathic mental retardation for subtelomeric aberrations using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). This recently developed technique is based on PCR amplification of ligated probes hybridized to chromosome ends. Currently, 41 telomeres can be screened in just two multiplex reactions. Four subtelomeric rearrangements (5.3%) were detected in a group of 75 patients with mild to severe mental retardation in combination with dysmorphic features and/or a familial history of mental retardation: two terminal 1p deletions, a terminal 1q deletion, and a terminal 3p deletion. Deletions could be verified by FISH and marker analysis. In one case the MLPA indicated a terminal 21q deletion due to a 3-bp deletion at the site of the probe, giving a false-positive rate of 1.3%. This study demonstrates that MLPA is a fast and reliable screening method, potentially suitable for use in routine diagnostics.
14695532	Twenty-two novel mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) underscore the genotype-phenotype correlation in glycogen storage disease type II. Patients with glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe disease) suffer from progressive muscle weakness due to acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with a spectrum of clinical phenotypes. We have investigated 29 cases of GSDII and thereby identified 55 pathogenic mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) encoding acid maltase. There were 34 different mutations identified, 22 of which were novel. All of the missense mutations and two other mutations with an unpredictable effect on acid alpha-glucosidase synthesis and function were transiently expressed in COS cells. The effect of a novel splice-site mutation was investigated by real-time PCR analysis. The outcome of our analysis underscores the notion that the clinical phenotype of GSDII is largely dictated by the nature of the mutations in the GAA alleles. This genotype-phenotype correlation makes DNA analysis a valuable tool to help predict the clinical course of the disease.
14722921	Context of deletions and insertions in human coding sequences. We studied the dependence of the rate of short deletions and insertions on their contexts using the data on mutations within coding exons at 19 human loci that cause mendelian diseases. We confirm that periodic sequences consisting of three to five or more nucleotides are mutagenic. Mutability of sequences with strongly biased nucleotide composition is also elevated, even when mutations within homonucleotide runs longer than three nucleotides are ignored. In contrast, no elevated mutation rates have been detected for imperfect direct or inverted repeats. Among known candidate contexts, the indel context GTAAGT and regions with purine-pyrimidine imbalance between the two DNA strands are mutagenic in our sample, and many others are not mutagenic. Data on mutation hot spots suggest two novel contexts that increase the deletion rate. Comprehensive analysis of mutability of all possible contexts of lengths four, six, and eight indicates a substantially elevated deletion rate within YYYTG and similar sequences, which is one of the two contexts revealed by the hot spots. Possible contexts that increase the insertion rate (AT(A/C)(A/C)GCC and TACCRC) and decrease deletion (TATCGC) or insertion (GCGG) rates have also been identified. Two-thirds of deletions remove a repeat, and over 80% of insertions create a repeat, i.e., they are duplications.
14974085	Noonan syndrome-associated SHP2/PTPN11 mutants cause EGF-dependent prolonged GAB1 binding and sustained ERK2/MAPK1 activation. Noonan syndrome is a developmental disorder with dysmorphic facies, short stature, cardiac defects, and skeletal anomalies, which can be caused by missense PTPN11 mutations. PTPN11 encodes Src homology 2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2 or SHP-2), a protein tyrosine phosphatase that acts in signal transduction downstream to growth factor, hormone, and cytokine receptors. We compared the functional effects of three Noonan syndrome-causative PTPN11 mutations on SHP2's phosphatase activity, interaction with a binding partner, and signal transduction. All SHP2 mutants had significantly increased basal phosphatase activity compared to wild type, but that activity varied significantly between mutants and was further increased after epidermal growth factor stimulation. Cells expressing SHP2 mutants had prolonged extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 activation, which was ligand-dependent. Binding of SHP2 mutants to Grb2-associated binder-1 was increased and sustained, and tyrosine phosphorylation of both proteins was prolonged. Coexpression of Grb2-associated binder-1-FF, which lacks SHP2 binding motifs, blocked the epidermal growth factor-mediated increase in SHP2's phosphatase activity and resulted in a dramatic reduction of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 activation. Taken together, these results document that Noonan syndrome-associated PTPN11 mutations increase SHP2's basal phosphatase activity, with greater activation when residues directly involved in binding at the interface between the N-terminal Src homology 2 and protein tyrosine phosphatase domains are altered. The SHP2 mutants prolonged signal flux through the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK2/MAPK1) pathway in a ligand-dependent manner that required docking through Grb2-associated binder-1 (GAB1), leading to increased cell proliferation.
15024727	Genetically heterogeneous selective intestinal malabsorption of vitamin B12: founder effects, consanguinity, and high clinical awareness explain aggregations in Scandinavia and the Middle East. Selective intestinal malabsorption of vitamin B(12) causing juvenile megaloblastic anemia (MGA; MIM# 261100) is a recessively inherited disorder that is believed to be rare except for notable clusters of cases in Finland, Norway, and the Eastern Mediterranean region. The disease can be caused by mutations in either the cubilin (CUBN; MGA1; MIM# 602997) or the amnionless (AMN; MIM# 605799) gene. To explain the peculiar geographical distribution, we hypothesized that mutations in one of the genes would mainly be responsible for the disease in Scandinavia, and mutations in the other gene in the Mediterranean region. We studied 42 sibships and found all cases in Finland to be due to CUBN (three different mutations) and all cases in Norway to be due to AMN (two different mutations), while in Turkey, Israel, and Saudi Arabia, there were two different AMN mutations and three different CUBN mutations. Haplotype evidence excluded both CUBN and AMN conclusively in five families and tentatively in three families, suggesting the presence of at least one more gene locus that can cause MGA. We conclude that the Scandinavian cases are typical examples of enrichment by founder effects, while in the Mediterranean region high degrees of consanguinity expose rare mutations in both genes. We suggest that in both regions, physician awareness of this disease causes it to be more readily diagnosed than elsewhere; thus, it may well be more common worldwide than previously thought.
15024732	Analysis of the allele-specific expression of the mismatch repair gene MLH1 using a simple DHPLC-Based Method. Quantitative measures of allele-specific gene expression allow the indirect detection of mutations or sequence variants in regulatory elements or in other non-coding regions that may result in significant physiological or pathological changes of gene expression and may contribute to Mendelian or multifactorial disorders. We have devised a simple method, based on RT-PCR and single nucleotide primer extension (SNuPE) with unlabelled dideoxynucleotides, followed by DHPLC (denaturing high performance liquid chromatography). We established optimal conditions for separation of the extended products corresponding to the alleles of the c.655A>G (p.Ile219Val) SNP, which is the most frequent exonic polymorphism of MLH1. We then genotyped 99 unrelated control subjects and measured the allele-specific MLH1 expression in the 40 heterozygous controls found in this group. This method allowed us to define a narrow range of normal biallelic expression of MLH1, each allele contributing between 44.7% and 55.3% of the total expression. We then measured the allele-specific expression in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) patients with MLH1 mRNAs bearing different stop-codon or frame-shift mutations, or in-frame deletions, in order to detect the effects of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Defects that induce mRNA instability were identified unambiguously and the data were consistent with current models of NMD. This study provides a sensitive tool to identify indirectly MLH1 defects that may escape detection in genomic DNA screenings but result in a quantitative change at the mRNA level.
15146469	Novel and recurrent mutations in the NF1 gene in Italian patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common autosomal dominant disorders in humans, affecting 1 in 3500 individuals. NF1 is a fully penetrant exhibiting a mutation rate some 10-fold higher compared to most other disease genes. As a consequence, a high number of cases (up to 50%) are sporadic. Mutation detection is complex due to the large size of NF1 gene, the presence of pseudogenes and the great variety of lesions. In the present study we attempted to delineate the NF1 mutational spectrum in the Italian population reporting four-year experience with the direct analysis of the whole NF1 coding region in 110 unrelated subjects affected by NF1. For each patient, the whole coding sequence and all splice sites were studied for mutations, either by the protein truncation test (PTT), or, most often, by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC). Mutations were identified in 75 (68%) patients. Twenty-two mutations were found to be novel. The detection rate for the different methods was 7/18 (39%) for PTT, and 68/103 (66%) for DHPLC. The mutations were evenly distributed along the NF1 coding sequence. Thirty-two of the 75 unrelated NF1 patients in which germline mutations were identified (32/75, 43%) harbour 23 different recurrent mutations. Fifteen sequence variants likely to represent non-pathogenic polymorphisms were observed at the NF1 locus. Genotype-phenotype analysis was unable to detect any obvious correlation.
15365989	Novel homozygous p.E64D mutation in DJ1 in early onset Parkinson disease (PARK7). Mutations in the parkin gene have been identified as a common cause of autosomal recessive inherited Parkinson disease (PD) associated with early disease manifestation. However, based on linkage data, mutations in other genes contribute to the genetic heterogeneity of early-onset PD (EOPD). Recently, two mutations in the DJ1 gene were described as a second cause of autosomal recessive EOPD (PARK7). Analyzing the PARK7/DJ1 gene in 104 EOPD patients, we identified a third mutation, c.192G>C (p.E64D), associated with EOPD in a patient of Turkish ancestry and characterized the functional significance of this amino acid substitution. In the patient, a substantial reduction of dopamine uptake transporter (DAT) binding was found in the striatum using [(18)F]FP-CIT and PET, indicating a serious loss of presynaptic dopaminergic afferents. His sister, homozygous for E64D, was clinically unaffected but showed reduced dopamine uptake when compared with a clinically unaffected brother, who is heterozygous for E64D. We demonstrate by crystallography that the E64D mutation does not alter the structure of the DJ1 protein, however we observe a tendency towards decreased levels of the mutant protein when overexpressed in HEK293 or COS7 cells. Using immunocytochemistry in contrast to the homogenous nuclear and cytoplasmic staining in HEK293 cells overexpressing wild-type DJ1, about 5% of the cells expressing E64D and up to 80% of the cells expressing the recently described L166P mutation displayed a predominant nuclear localization of the mutant DJ1 protein.
15365995	Germline mutations in MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 in Korean hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer families. Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), the most common hereditary colon cancer syndrome, is a dominant disorder caused by germline defects in mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Identification of MMR gene mutations can have direct clinical implications in counseling and management of HNPCC families. We screened 44 HNPCC and 97 suspected HNPCC Korean families for germline mutations in three MMR genes: MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6. We identified twelve novel mutations: nine in MLH1(c.632_633insT, c.808_811delACTT, c.845C>G, c.1625A>C, c.1730+1delG, c.1907T>C, c.1918C>T, c.2104-2A>G and c.2170T>A), two in MSH2 (c.1886A>G, c.1316_1318delCCT) and one in MSH6 (c.3488A>T). In addition, two statically significant cSNPs in MLH1: c.1128T>C ( p=0.008 in HNPCC and p=0.037 in early-onset CRC) and c.2168C>A ( p<0.001 in HNPCC). Interestingly, the most frequent mutation, c.1757_1758insC in MLH1, was a founder mutation inherited from a common Korean ancestor.
15459972	Novel and recurrent mutations clustered in the von Willebrand factor A domain of MATN3 in multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) is a common skeletal dysplasia characterized by joint pain and stiffness, delayed and irregular ossification of epiphyses, and early-onset osteoarthritis. Six genes responsible for MED have been identified, including COMP, COL9A1, COL9A2, COL9A3, DSTDT and MATN3. MATN3 encodes matrilin-3, a cartilage-specific extracellular matrix protein. To date, seven different MATN3 mutations have been identified; all are located within the beta-sheet regions of the von Willebrand factor type A (vWFA) domain, which is encoded by exon 2. We examined MATN3 mutations in27 Japanese MED patients who were possibly autosomal dominant inheritance and had been excluded for COMP mutations. Ten of them had a positive family history. We examined all eight exons of MATN3 by PCR and direct sequencing from genomic DNA. We have identified four missense mutations in eight unrelated families; two are novel, and two have been characterized previously. Like previously characterized MATN3 mutations, those identified in this study are clustered within exon 2, specifically in and around the 2nd beta-sheet region of the vWFA domain (aa. 120-127). Contrary to the previous assumption that the MATN3 mutation in MED is confined to the beta-sheet regions, one novel mutation (p.F105S) is located outside the beta-sheet region, within an alpha-helix region.
15712269	Identification and characterization of five novel MAN2B1 mutations in Italian patients with alpha-mannosidosis. Mutation analysis performed on six Italian families with alpha-mannosidosis type II allowed the identification of five new mutations in the MAN2B1 gene: c.157G>T, c.562C>T, c.599A>T, c.293dupA, c.2402G>A (p.E53X, p.R188X, p.H200L, p.Y99VfsX61, p.G801D). Protein residues G801 and H200 are conserved among the four mammalian alpha-mannosidases cloned to date: human, cattle, cat and mouse. In vitro expression studies demonstrated that both missense mutations expressed no residual alpha-mannosidase activity indicating that they are disease-causing mutations. Modelling into the three-dimensional structure revealed that the p.H200L could involve the catalytic mechanism, whereas p.G801D would affect the correct folding of the enzyme.
15776426	Mutational analysis of the NPHP4 gene in 250 patients with nephronophthisis. Nephronophthisis (NPH), a recessive cystic kidney disease, is the most frequent genetic cause for end-stage renal disease in the first two decades of life. Mutations in three genes (NPHP1, 2, and 3) were identified as causative. Extrarenal manifestations are known, such as retinitis pigmentosa (Senior-Loken syndrome, SLS) and ocular motor apraxia type Cogan. Recently, we identified a novel gene (NPHP4) as mutated in NPH. To date, a total of only 13 different NPHP4 mutations have been described. To determine the frequency of NPHP4 mutations, we performed mutational analysis by direct sequencing of all 30 NPHP4 exons in 250 different patients with isolated NPH, SLS, or Cogan syndrome ascertained worldwide over 14 years. We identified 23 novel NPHP4 sequence variants in 26/250 different patients (10%). Interestingly, we detected homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations of NPHP4 in only 6/250 different patients (2.4%), but only one heterozygous NPHP4 sequence variant in 20/250 different patients (8%). In the six patients with two NPHP4 mutations, 5/8 mutations (63%) were likely loss-of-function mutations, whereas in the 20 patients with only one sequence variant, only 1/20 (5%) was a likely loss-of-function (i.e., truncating) mutation. We conclude that: i) two recessive mutations in NPHP4 are a rare cause of nephronophthisis; ii) single heterozygous NPHP4 sequence variants are three times more prevalent than two recessive mutations; iii) there is no genotype/phenotype correlation; iv) there must exist further genes causing nephronophthisis, since in 224/250 (90%) patients, no sequence variants in either of the four NPH genes were detected.
15937921	Niemann-Pick type C disease: subcellular location and functional characterization of NPC2 proteins with naturally occurring missense mutations. Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC), a severe neurovisceral lysosomal disorder, is due to mutations on the NPC1 gene or, in a minority of families, the NPC2 gene. Few investigations have been devoted to the NPC2 protein, for which only 13 different disease-causing mutations (including three novel ones in this report) have been described. Among the currently known NPC2 mutant alleles, six resulted in a premature stop codon. Only five missense mutations, c.115G>A (p.V39M), c.140G>T (p.C47F), c.199T>C (p.S67P), c.278G>T (p.C93F), and (this report) c.295T>C (p.C99R) were identified. In the present study, we generated cDNA constructs harboring each of these missense mutations and, upon overexpression in human fibroblasts with a nonsense NPC2 mutation, characterized the mutated proteins by immunoblotting, immunocytofluorescence microscopy, and complementation. Mutation p.V39M, described in the homozygous state in two patients with an adult-onset neurological disease, resulted in the synthesis of apparently functional recombinant proteins correctly targeted to lysosomes. Although a mild functional impact could possibly be overlooked in our overexpression system, comparative studies with NPC1 mutants indicated that mild mutations might not necessarily affect localization of the protein or its quantity in the native state. Conversely, mutations p.C47F, p.C93R, p.C99R but also, less predictably, p.S67P, led to the synthesis of misfolded recombinant proteins that colocalized with an endoplasmic reticulum marker. The four latter proteins were normally secreted but were unable to correct cholesterol storage in NPC2(-/-) cells. Functional characterization of the mutant proteins showed an excellent genotype-phenotype correlation in the three cases for whom a clinical history was available.
16086324	Comparison of yield and genotyping performance of multiple displacement amplification and OmniPlex whole genome amplified DNA generated from multiple DNA sources. The promise of whole genome amplification (WGA) is that genomic DNA (gDNA) quantity will not limit molecular genetic analyses. Multiple displacement amplification (MDA) and the OmniPlex PCR-based WGA protocols were evaluated using 4 and 5 ng of input gDNA from 60 gDNA samples from three tissue sources (mouthwash, buffy coat, and lymphoblast). WGA DNA (wgaDNA) yield and genotyping performance were evaluated using genotypes determined from gDNA and wgaDNA using the AmpFlSTR Identifiler assay and N = 49 TaqMan SNP assays. Short tandem repeat (STR) and SNP genotyping completion and concordance rates were significantly reduced with wgaDNA from all WGA methods compared with gDNA. OmniPlex wgaDNA exhibited a greater reduction in genotyping performance than MDA wgaDNA. Reduced wgaDNA genotyping performance was due to allelic (all protocols) and locus (OmniPlex) amplification bias leading to heterozygote and locus dropout, respectively, and %GC sequence content (%GC) was significantly correlated with TaqMan assay performance. Lymphoblast wgaDNA exhibited higher yield (OmniPlex), buffy coat wgaDNA exhibited higher STR genotyping completion (MDA), whereas mouthwash wgaDNA exhibited higher SNP genotyping discordance (MDA). Genotyping of wgaDNA generated from < or = 5 ng gDNA, e.g., from archaeological, forensic, prenatal diagnostic, or pathology samples, may require additional genotyping validation with gDNA and/or more sophisticated analysis of genotypes incorporating observed reductions in genotyping performance.
16088919	ATP1A2 mutations in 11 families with familial hemiplegic migraine. Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is an autosomal dominant form of migraine with aura. The disease is caused by mutations of at least three genes among which two have been identified, CACNA1A and ATP1A2. Very few mutations have been identified so far in ATP1A2. We screened the coding sequence of ATP1A2 in 26 unrelated FHM probands in whom CACNA1A screening was negative. A total of eight different mutations were identified in 11 of the probands (41%), including six missense mutations, one small deletion leading to a frameshift, and one in frame deletion. All were novel mutations. Two mutations were recurrent, in three and two families, respectively. Genotyping of 94 relatives of these 11 probands identified 47 mutation carriers, among whom 36 were clinically affected. Sequencing of all 23 exons in an ethnically matched panel detected only one exonic coding polymorphism.
16110485	Intrachromosomal serial replication slippage in trans gives rise to diverse genomic rearrangements involving inversions. Serial replication slippage in cis (SRScis) provides a plausible explanation for many complex genomic rearrangements that underlie human genetic disease. This concept, taken together with the intra- and intermolecular strand switch models that account for mutations that arise via quasipalindrome correction, suggest that intrachromosomal SRS in trans (SRStrans) mediated by short inverted repeats may also give rise to a diverse series of complex genomic rearrangements. If this were to be so, such rearrangements would invariably generate inversions. To test this idea, we collated all informative mutations involving inversions of >or=5 bp but <1 kb by screening the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD; www.hgmd.org) and conducting an extensive literature search. Of the 21 resulting mutations, only two (both of which coincidentally contain untemplated additions) were found to be incompatible with the SRStrans model. Eighteen (one simple inversion, six inversions involving sequence replacement by upstream or downstream sequence, five inversions involving the partial reinsertion of removed sequence, and six inversions that occurred in a more complicated context) of the remaining 19 mutations were found to be consistent with either two steps of intrachromosomal SRStrans or a combination of replication slippage in cis plus intrachromosomal SRStrans. The remaining lesion, a 31-kb segmental duplication associated with a small inversion in the SLC3A1 gene, is explicable in terms of a modified SRS model that integrates the concept of "break-induced replication." This study therefore lends broad support to our postulate that intrachromosomal SRStrans can account for a variety of complex gene rearrangements that involve inversions.
16110494	Rare missense variants in ATP1A2 in families with clustering of common forms of migraine. Migraine is a recurrent neurovascular disease. Its two most common forms-migraine without aura (MO) and migraine with aura (MA)-both show familial clustering and a complex pattern of inheritance. Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is a rare monogenic subform caused by mutations in the calcium channel gene CACNA1A or the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase gene ATP1A2. An involvement of FHM genes in the pathogenesis of common forms of migraine is not proven. We therefore systematically screened ATP1A2 in families with several members affected by MA and/or MO. We identified two novel missense alterations [c.520G>A (p.E174 K) and c.1544G>A (p.C515Y)] in two out of 45 families, which were not found in 520 control chromosomes. Functional studies of these variants in Xenopus oocytes by two-electrode voltage clamp measurements and radiochemical determination of ATPase activity showed that C515Y leads to a complete loss of function comparable with the effect of FHM-mutations whereas for E174 K no functional alteration could be found in the in vitro assays. In conclusion we propose that rare variants in ATP1A2 are involved in the susceptibility to common forms of migraine, because of 1) the absence of alterations in controls, 2) the particular pattern of segregation in both families, 3) the high conservation of mutated residues in Na(+)/K(+)-ATPases, 4) the functional effect of C515Y, and 5) the involvement of ATP1A2 in a monogenic form of migraine.
16116623	Whole genome SNP arrays using DNA derived from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded ovarian tumor tissue. Array-based genotyping platforms, such as the Affymetrix mapping array, have been validated as reliable methods for obtaining high-resolution copy number and allele status information when using DNA derived from fresh tissue sources. However, the suitability of such systems for the examination of DNA derived from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues has not been tested. Therefore, we analyzed DNA derived from five matching fresh frozen and FFPE ovarian tumors for gene copy number changes and loss of heterozygosity using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 10 K Array Xba 131. The data was analyzed using Affymetrix proprietary software, GeneChip DNA Analysis Software, and Chromosome Copy Number Tool. The average SNP call rate (rate of successful genotype identification) of the fresh samples was 89.44% (range 78.72-96.22%, median 92.72%) and was only slightly lower for the matching FFPE samples at 83.48% (range 76.93-93.17%, median 82.60%). The average concordance (rate of agreement between successful genotype calls) between the fresh and matching FFPE samples was 97.06% (range 92.70-99.41%, median 97.52%). Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) profiles of the fresh and FFPE samples were essentially identical across all chromosomes. Copy number data was also comparable, although the quantification of copy number changes appears overstated in the FFPE samples. In conclusion, we have shown that it is possible to achieve high-performance outcomes using FFPE-derived DNA in the Affymetrix 10 K mapping array. This advance will open up vast archival tissue resources to high-resolution genetic analysis and unlock a wealth of biological information.
16138310	Molecular diagnosis of inherited disorders: lessons from hemoglobinopathies. Hemoglobinopathies constitute a major health problem worldwide, with a high carrier frequency, particularly in certain regions where malaria has been endemic. These disorders are characterized by a vast clinical and hematological phenotypic heterogeneity. Over 1,200 different genetic alterations that affect the DNA sequence of the human alpha-like (HBZ, HBA2, HBA1, and HBQ1) and beta-like (HBE1, HBG2, HBG1, HBD, and HBB) globin genes are mainly responsible for the observed clinical heterogeneity. These mutations, together with detailed information about the resulting phenotype, are documented in the globin locus-specific HbVar database. Family studies and comprehensive hematological analyses provide useful insights for accurately diagnosing thalassemia at the DNA level. For this purpose, numerous techniques can provide accurate, rapid, and cost-effective identification of the underlying genetic defect in affected individuals. The aim of this article is to review the diverse methodological and technical platforms available for the molecular diagnosis of inherited disorders, using thalassemia and hemoglobinopathies as a model. This article also attempts to shed light on issues closely related to thalassemia diagnostics, such as prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnoses and genetic counseling, for better-quality disease management.
16211558	Novel mutations of the PCSK9 gene cause variable phenotype of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia. Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is a frequent (1/500) monogenic inherited disorder characterized by isolated elevation of LDL leading to premature cardiovascular disease. ADH is known to result from mutations at two main loci: LDLR (encoding the low density lipoprotein receptor), and APOB (encoding apolipoprotein B100), its natural ligand. We previously demonstrated that ADH is also caused by mutations of the PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9) gene that encodes Narc-1 (neural apoptosis-regulated convertase 1). However, the role of this novel disease locus as a cause of hypercholesterolemia remains unclear. In the present study, we analysed the PCSK9 coding region and intronic junctions in 130 adult or pediatric patients with ADH, previously found as being non LDLR/non APOB mutation carriers. Four novel heterozygous missense variations were found: c.654A>T (p.R218S), c.1070G>A (p.R357H), c.1405C>T (p.R469W), and c.1327G>A (p.A443T). All mutations were absent in 340 normolipidemic controls. Except for the A443T, all mutations are nonconservative and modify a highly conserved residue. Segregation with hypercholesterolemia is incomplete in one pedigree. Type and severity of hyperlipidemia and of cardiovascular disease could vary among subjects from the same family. Finally, the proband carrying the R357H mutation exhibited very high plasma cholesterol during pregnancy, whereas the proband carrying the p.R469W mutation exhibited a severe phenotype of hypercholesterolemia in combination with a LDLR mutation resulting from a frameshift at residue F382 (1209delC). These observations suggest that variations in PCSK9 are a rare cause of non LDLR/non APOB ADH (approximately 2.3%) and that additional environmental or genetic factors may contribute to the phenotype caused by PCSK9 missense mutations in humans.
16281286	Spectrum of mutations in mut methylmalonic acidemia and identification of a common Hispanic mutation and haplotype. Cobalamin nonresponsive methylmalonic acidemia (MMA, mut complementation class) results from mutations in the nuclear gene MUT, which codes for the mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl CoA mutase (MCM). To better elucidate the spectrum of mutations that cause MMA, the MUT gene was sequenced in 160 patients with mut MMA. Sequence analysis identified mutations in 96% of disease alleles. Mutations were found in all coding exons, but predominantly in exons 2, 3, 6, and 11. A total of 116 different mutations, 68 of which were novel, were identified. Of the 116 different mutations, 53% were missense mutations, 22% were deletions, duplications or insertions, 16% were nonsense mutations, and 9% were splice-site mutations. Sixty-one of the mutations have only been identified in one family. A novel mutation in exon 2, c.322C>T (p.R108C), was identified in 16 of 27 Hispanic patients. SNP genotyping data demonstrated that Hispanic patients with this mutation share a common haplotype. Three other mutations were seen exclusively in Hispanic patients: c.280G>A (p.G94R), c.1022dupA, and c.970G>A (p.A324T). Seven mutations were seen almost exclusively in black patients, including the previously reported c.2150G>T (p.G717V) mutation, which was identified in 12 of 29 black patients. Two mutations were seen only in Asian patients. Some frequently identified mutations were not population-specific and were identified in patients of various ethnic backgrounds. Some of these mutations were found in mutation clusters in exons 2, 3, 6, and 11, suggesting a recurrent mutation.
16329098	HEY2 mutations in malformed hearts. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hey2 (gridlock) is an important determinant of mammalian heart development, but its role in human ventricular septal defects is unknown. Hey2 functions as a repressor through the bHLH domain. By direct sequencing, we analyzed the sequences encoding the bHLH domain of the human HEY2 in 52 explanted hearts of unrelated patients with complex cardiac malformations, notably ventricular (VSD) and atrioventricular septal defects (AVSD). We found three nonsynonymous mutations, namely, c.286A>G (p.Thr96Ala), c.293A>C (p.Asp98Ala), and c.299T>C (p.Leu100Ser) affecting the second helix of HEY2 in the diseased cardiac tissues of two patients with AVSD. This result suggests a possible role of HEY2 in the regulation of ventricular septation in humans. Since the two AVSD patients carried also binding domain mutations in other cardiac-specific transcription factors, e.g. NKX2-5, TBX5, and GATA4, breakdown of combinatorial interactions of transcription factors may have contributed to the complexity of their cardiac malformations.
16395665	Prioritizing regions of candidate genes for efficient mutation screening. The availability of the complete sequence of the human genome has dramatically facilitated the search for disease-causing sequence variations. In fact, the rate-limiting step has shifted from the discovery and characterization of candidate genes to the actual screening of human populations and the subsequent interpretation of observed variations. In this study we tested the hypothesis that some segments of candidate genes are more likely than others to contain disease-causing variations and that these segments can be predicted bioinformatically. A bioinformatic technique, prioritization of annotated regions (PAR), was developed to predict the likelihood that a specific coding region of a gene will harbor a disease-causing mutation based on conserved protein functional domains and protein secondary structures. This method was evaluated by using it to analyze 710 genes that collectively harbor 4,498 previously identified mutations. Nearly 50% of the genes were recognized as disease-associated after screening only 9% of the complete coding sequence. The PAR technique identified 90% of the genes as containing at least one mutation, with less than 40% of the screening resources that traditional approaches would require. These results suggest that prioritization strategies such as PAR can accelerate disease-gene identification through more efficient use of screening resources.
16411177	Masking selected sequence variation by incorporating mismatches into melting analysis probes. Hybridization probe melting analysis can be complicated by the presence of sequence variation (benign polymorphisms or other mutations) near the targeted mutation. We investigated the use of "masking" probes to differentiate alleles with similar probe melting temperatures. Selected sequence variation was masked by incorporating mismatches (deletion, unmatched nucleotide, or universal base) into hybridization probes at the polymorphic location. Such masking probes create a probe/target mismatch with all possible alleles at the selected polymorphic location. Any allele with additional variation at another site is identified by a lower probe melting temperature than alleles that vary only at the masked position. This "masking technique" was applied to RET protooncogene and HPA6 mutation detection using unlabeled hybridization probes, a saturating dsDNA dye, and high-resolution melting analysis. Masking probes clearly distinguished all targeted mutations from polymorphisms when at least 1 base pair (bp) separated the mutation from the masked variation. We were able to mask polymorphisms immediately adjacent to mutations, except in certain cases, such as those involving single-base deletion probes when both adjacent positions had the same polymorphic nucleotides. The masking probes can also localize mutations to specific codons or nucleotide positions. Masking probes can simplify melting analysis of complex regions and eliminate the need for sequencing.
16671095	A homozygous ZMPSTE24 null mutation in combination with a heterozygous mutation in the LMNA gene causes Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS): insights into the pathophysiology of HGPS. Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is a rare premature aging disorder normally caused by a spontaneous heterozygous mutation in the LMNA gene that codes for the nuclear lamina protein lamin A. Several enzymes are involved in the processing of its precursor, prelamin A, to the mature lamin A. A functional knockout of one of the enzymes involved in prelamin A processing, the zinc metalloprotease ZMPSTE24, causes an even more severe disorder with early neonatal death described as restrictive dermatopathy (RD). This work describes a HGPS patient with a combined defect of a homozygous loss-of-function mutation in the ZMPSTE24 gene and a heterozygous mutation in the LMNA gene that results in a C-terminal elongation of the final lamin A. Whereas the loss of function mutation of ZMPSTE24 normally results in lethal RD, the truncation of LMNA seems to be a salvage alteration alleviating the clinical picture to the HGPS phenotype. The mutations of our patient indicate that farnesylated prelamin A is the deleterious agent leading to the HGPS phenotype, which gives further insights into the pathophysiology of the disorder.
16673358	The spectrum of WRN mutations in Werner syndrome patients. The International Registry of Werner syndrome (www.wernersyndrome.org) has been providing molecular diagnosis of the Werner syndrome (WS) for the past decade. The present communication summarizes, from among 99 WS subjects, the spectrum of 50 distinct mutations discovered by our group and by others since the WRN gene (also called RECQL2 or REQ3) was first cloned in 1996; 25 of these have not previously been published. All WRN mutations reported thus far have resulted in the elimination of the nuclear localization signal at the C-terminus of the protein, precluding functional interactions in the nucleus; thus, all could be classified as null mutations. We now report two new mutations in the N-terminus that result in instability of the WRN protein. Clinical data confirm that the most penetrant phenotype is bilateral ocular cataracts. Other cardinal signs were seen in more than 95% of the cases. The median age of death, previously reported to be in the range of 46-48 years, is 54 years. Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) have been cryopreserved from the majority of our index cases, including material from nuclear pedigrees. These, as well as inducible and complemented hTERT (catalytic subunit of human telomerase) immortalized skin fibroblast cell lines are available to qualified investigators.
16906510	Visualization of MAPT inversion on stretched chromosomes of tau-negative frontotemporal dementia patients.
16917930	Structural assessment of single amino acid mutations: application to TP53 function. Single amino acid substitution is the type of protein alteration most related to human diseases. Current studies seek primarily to distinguish neutral mutations from harmful ones. Very few methods offer an explanation of the final prediction result in terms of the probable structural or functional effect on the protein. In this study, we describe the use of three novel parameters to identify experimentally-verified critical residues of the TP53 protein (p53). The first two parameters make use of a surface clustering method to calculate the protein surface area of highly conserved regions or regions with high nonlocal atomic interaction energy (ANOLEA) score. These parameters help identify important functional regions on the surface of a protein. The last parameter involves the use of a new method for pseudobinding free-energy estimation to specifically probe the importance of residue side-chains to the stability of protein fold. A decision tree was designed to optimally combine these three parameters. The result was compared to the functional data stored in the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) TP53 mutation database. The final prediction achieved a prediction accuracy of 70% and a Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.45. It also showed a high specificity of 91.8%. Mutations in the 85 correctly identified important residues represented 81.7% of the total mutations recorded in the database. In addition, the method was able to correctly assign a probable functional or structural role to the residues. Such information could be critical for the interpretation and prediction of the effect of missense mutations, as it not only provided the fundamental explanation of the observed effect, but also helped design the most appropriate laboratory experiment to verify the prediction results.
16941471	Comprehensive NF1 screening on cultured Schwann cells from neurofibromas. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is mainly characterized by the occurrence of benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors or neurofibromas. Thorough investigation of the somatic mutation spectrum has thus far been hampered by the large size of the NF1 gene and the considerable proportion of NF1 heterozygous cells within the tumors. We developed an improved somatic mutation detection strategy on cultured Schwann cells derived from neurofibromas and investigated 38 tumors from nine NF1 patients. Twenty-nine somatic NF1 lesions were detected which represents the highest NF1 somatic mutation detection rate described so far (76%). Furthermore, our data strongly suggest that the acquired second hit underlies reduced NF1 expression in Schwann cell cultures. Together, these data clearly illustrate that two inactivating NF1 mutations, in a subpopulation of the Schwann cells, are required for neurofibroma formation in NF1 tumorigenesis. The observed somatic mutation spectrum shows that intragenic NF1 mutations (26/29) are most prevalent, particularly frameshift mutations (12/29, 41%). We hypothesize that this mutation signature might reflect slightly reduced DNA repair efficiency as a trigger for NF1 somatic inactivation preceding tumorigenesis. Joint analysis of the current and previously published NF1 mutation data revealed a significant difference in the somatic mutation spectrum in patients with a NF1 microdeletion vs. non-microdeletion patients with respect to the prevalence of loss of heterozygosity events (0/15 vs. 41/81). Differences in somatic inactivation mechanism might therefore exist between NF1 microdeletion patients and the general NF1 population.
17024664	Genotype-phenotype correlations in von Hippel-Lindau disease. von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is a dominantly inherited familial cancer syndrome resulting from mutations in the VHL tumor suppressor gene. VHL disease displays marked variation in expression and the presence of pheochromocytoma has been linked to missense VHL mutations. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations in 573 individuals with VHL disease. Routine clinical and radiological surveillance of VHL patients and at-risk relatives was associated with increased detection of retinal angiomatosis (73 vs. 59% of cases) and a reduction in age at diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) (44.0+/-10.9 vs. 39.7+/-10.3 years). We confirmed the association of pheochromocytoma with missense mutations described previously, but stratifying missense mutations into those that resulted in substitution of a surface amino acid and those that disrupted structural integrity demonstrated that surface amino acid substitutions conferred a higher pheochromocytoma risk. Age at first manifestation of VHL disease was significantly earlier (P=0.001), and age-related risks of retinal angiomas and RCC were higher (P=0.022 and P=0.0008, respectively) in individuals with a nonsense or frameshift mutation than in those with deletions or missense mutations that disrupted the structural integrity of the VHL gene product (pVHL). These results extend genotype-phenotype-protein structure correlations in VHL disease and provide a baseline for future chemoprevention studies in VHL disease.
17041889	Recessive arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia due to novel cryptic splice mutation in PKP2. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD) is a genetic disorder resulting in fibro-fatty replacement of right ventricular myocytes and consequent ventricular arrhythmias. Heterozygous mutations in PKP2 encoding plakophilin-2 have previously been reported to cause dominant ARVD with reduced penetrance. We report the first case of recessive ARVD caused by mutations in PKP2. Candidate gene analysis in a typical proband with this disorder identified a novel homozygous mutation in PKP2 (c.[2484C>T]+[2484C>T]), which is predicted to be translationally silent (p.Gly828). Analysis of the proband's mRNA, however, shows that this mutation causes predominantly cryptic splicing, with a 7-nucleotide deletion in exon 12. The ensuing frame shift disrupts the last 54 amino acids of plakophilin-2 and extends the open reading frame by 145 nucleotides (48 amino acids) into the 3' untranslated region. Haplotype analysis demonstrates the absence of remote consanguinity. Heterozygous family members produce approximately 60% of properly spliced PKP2 and do not have manifestations of ARVD. Further analysis of PKP2 mRNA sequence revealed two additional alternatively spliced transcripts. The possibility of cryptic or alternative splicing should be considered with identification of apparently synonymous nucleotide substitutions in this gene.
17203459	ZFHX1B mutations in patients with Mowat-Wilson syndrome. Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a recently delineated mental retardation (MR)-multiple congenital anomaly syndrome, characterized by typical facies, severe MR, epilepsy, and variable congenital malformations, including Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), genital anomalies, congenital heart disease (CHD), and agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC). It is caused by de novo heterozygous mutations or deletions of the ZFHX1B gene located at 2q22. ZFHX1B encodes Smad-interacting protein-1 (SMADIP1 or SIP1), a transcriptional corepressor involved in the transforming growth factor-beta signaling pathway. It is a highly evolutionarily conserved gene, widely expressed in embryological development. Over 100 mutations have been described in patients with clinically typical MWS, who almost always have whole gene deletions or truncating mutations (nonsense or frameshift) of ZFHX1B, suggesting that haploinsufficiency is the basis of MWS pathology. No obvious genotype-phenotype correlation could be identified so far, but atypical phenotypes have been reported with missense or splice mutations in the ZFHX1B gene. In this work we describe 40 novel mutations and we summarize the various mutational reports published since the identification of the causative gene.
17279550	Comprehensive evaluation of allele frequency differences of MC1R variants across populations. The melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R), a member of the G protein-coupled receptors superfamily, mediates the response to melanocortins and is currently the best-described contributor to normal pigment variation in humans. A remarkably large number of natural polymorphisms, or variants, of the MC1R gene have been identified in different populations. Some of these variants have been associated with specific hair and skin color phenotypes, the presence of freckling, and melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancer risk. Interestingly, some MC1R variants have been associated with skin cancer beyond their effects on pigmentation. Although the red hair color variants (RHC variants) have been associated with skin cancer risk in the Celtic population, studies in darkly-pigmented Caucasian populations have demonstrated the importance of non-RHC MC1R variants on skin cancer risk as well. We have reviewed and compared allele frequency differences of MC1R variants across geographic regions. We observed large differences in the distribution of variants across populations, with a prominent difference between lightly and darkly-pigmented individuals. Moreover, among Caucasian groups, there were seven variants (p.V60L, p.V92M, p.D84E, p.R151C, p.R160W, p.R163Q, and p.D294H) with significantly different allele frequencies. Exploring differences in allele frequencies of MC1R variants across populations with varying pigmentation and differing skin cancer risk may improve our understanding of the complex relationship between MC1R, pigmentation, and carcinogenesis.
17285591	Partial duplication at AZFc on the Y chromosome is a risk factor for impaired spermatogenesis in Han Chinese in Taiwan. The Azoospermia Factor c (AZFc) region on the Y chromosome long arm is one of the least stable regions in the human genome. It consists almost entirely of very long repeats and is prone to rearrangement. Numerous structures at AZFc have been identified, and some of them have been reported to be associated with male infertility. We screened 580 Han Chinese in Taiwan for AZFc deletion and duplication using three PCR assays, and characterized the DAZ genes in selected subjects with additional Southern analyses. About 9.5% of our subjects have AZFc partial deletion, 2.8% have partial deletion followed by duplication, and 1.7% have partial duplication. The overall rearrangement frequencies vary significantly between different Y chromosome haplogroups (Yhgs), ranging from 2.9% in O3e to 100% in N and Q. All individuals in Yhg-N lack the sY1191 marker, but one out of three of them actually have four DAZ genes, indicating further duplication after the b2/b3 deletion. Our additional screening of 142 oligospermic men and 107 fertile controls found no significant difference in the frequencies of the gr/gr and the b2/b3 deletion. However, the frequency of AZFc partial duplication in the infertile group (7.0%) was significantly higher than that in the fertile control group (0.9%) and the general Taiwanese population (1.7%). Our results indicate that AZFc partial deletion and partial duplication are common polymorphisms in Han Chinese, and that the AZFc partial duplication, but not the AZFc partial deletion, is a risk factor for male infertility in the Taiwanese population.
17311297	Extensive in silico analysis of NF1 splicing defects uncovers determinants for splicing outcome upon 5' splice-site disruption. We describe 94 pathogenic NF1 gene alterations in a cohort of 97 Austrian neurofibromatosis type 1 patients meeting the NIH criteria. All mutations were fully characterized at the genomic and mRNA levels. Over half of the patients carried novel mutations, and only a quarter carried recurrent minor-lesion mutations at 16 mutational warm spots. The remaining patients carried NF1 microdeletions (7%) and rare recurring mutations. Thirty-six of the mutations (38%) altered pre-mRNA splicing, and fall into five groups: exon skipping resulting from mutations at authentic splice sites (type I), cryptic exon inclusion caused by deep intronic mutations (type II), creation of de novo splice sites causing loss of exonic sequences (type III), activation of cryptic splice sites upon authentic splice-site disruption (type IV), and exonic sequence alterations causing exon skipping (type V). Extensive in silico analyses of 37 NF1 exons and surrounding intronic sequences suggested that the availability of a cryptic splice site combined with a strong natural upstream 3' splice site (3'ss)is the main determinant of cryptic splice-site activation upon 5' splice-site disruption. Furthermore, the exonic sequences downstream of exonic cryptic 5' splice sites (5'ss) resemble intronic more than exonic sequences with respect to exonic splicing enhancer and silencer density, helping to distinguish between exonic cryptic and pseudo 5'ss. This study provides valuable predictors for the splicing pathway used upon 5'ss mutation, and underscores the importance of using RNA-based techniques, together with methods to identify microdeletions and intragenic copy-number changes, for effective and reliable NF1 mutation detection.
17492639	Characterization of a familial t(16;22) balanced translocation associated with congenital cataract leads to identification of a novel gene, TMEM114, expressed in the lens and disrupted by the translocation. Molecular characterization of chromosomal rearrangements is a powerful resource in identification of genes associated with monogenic disorders. We describe the molecular characterization of a balanced familial chromosomal translocation, t(16;22)(p13.3;q11.2), segregating with congenital lamellar cataract. This led to the discovery of a cluster of lens-derived expressed sequence tags (ESTs) close to the 16p13.3 breakpoint. This region harbors a locus associated with cataract and microphthalmia. Long-range PCR and 16p13.3 breakpoint sequencing identified genomic sequence in a human genome sequence gap, and allowed identification of a novel four-exon gene, designated TMEM114, which encodes a predicted protein of 223 amino acids. The breakpoint lies in the promoter region of TMEM114 and separates the gene from predicted eye-specific upstream transcription factor binding sites. There is sequence conservation among orthologs down to zebrafish. The protein is predicted to contain four transmembrane domains with homology to the lens intrinsic membrane protein, LIM2 (also known as MP20), in the PMP-22/EMP/MP20 family. TMEM114 mutation screening in 130 congenital cataract patients revealed missense mutations leading to the exchange of highly-conserved amino acids in the first extracellular domain of the protein (p.I35T, p.F106L) in two separate patients and their reportedly healthy sibling and mother, respectively. In the lens, Tmem114 shows expression in the lens epithelial cells extending into the transitional zone where early fiber differentiation occurs. Our findings implicate dysregulation of expression of this novel human gene, TMEM114, in mammalian cataract formation.
17579354	Women heterozygous for NALP7/NLRP7 mutations are at risk for reproductive wastage: report of two novel mutations. Familial recurrent hydatidiform moles are a rare recessive condition in which molar tissues have biparental contribution to their genome. One maternal locus responsible for this condition has been mapped to 19q13.4 and the causative gene, NALP7, identified (HUGO-approved nomenclature is now NLRP7). Here we report a first stop codon, c.295G>T (p.Glu99X) and a missense mutation, c.1970A>T (p.Asp657Val) in NLRP7 in two sisters with RHMs. We found these two mutations and a previously reported one, c.2078G>C (p.Arg693Pro) in a homozygous state, in males with normal reproductive outcomes. This suggests that NLRP7 is not required for normal spermatogenesis. The mother of the patients is heterozygous for Glu99X and had one stillbirth and three normal pregnancies. Our data on this new family and on heterozygous women from previously reported families indicate that women heterozygous for NLRP7 mutations are at risk for reproductive wastage without the manifestation of molar phenotype.
17594715	Spectrum of ALMS1 variants and evaluation of genotype-phenotype correlations in Alström syndrome. Alström syndrome is a monogenic recessive disorder featuring an array of clinical manifestations, with systemic fibrosis and multiple organ involvement, including retinal degeneration, hearing loss, childhood obesity, diabetes mellitus, dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), urological dysfunction, and pulmonary, hepatic, and renal failure. We evaluated a large cohort of patients with Alström syndrome for mutations in the ALMS1 gene. In total, 79 disease-causing variants were identified, of which 55 are novel mutations. The variants are primarily clustered in exons 8, 10, and 16, although we also identified novel mutations in exons 12 and 18. Most alleles were identified only once (45/79), but several were found recurrently. Founder effects are likely in families of English and Turkish descent. We also identified 66 SNPs and assessed the functional significance of these variants based on the conserved identity of the protein and the severity of the resulting amino acid substitution. A genotype-phenotype association study examining 18 phenotypic parameters in a subset of 58 patients found suggestive associations between disease-causing variants in exon 16 and the onset of retinal degeneration before the age of 1 year (P = 0.02), the occurrence of urological dysfunction (P = 0.02), of DCM (P = 0.03), and of diabetes (P = 0.03). A significant association was found between alterations in exon 8 and absent, mild, or delayed renal disease (P = 0.0007). This data may have implications for the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of ALMS1 and provides the basis for further investigation of how alternative splicing of ALMS1 contributes to the severity of the disease.
17621637	Lack of SSH1 mutations in Dutch patients with disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis: is there really an association?
17621639	Detection of pathogenic gene copy number variations in patients with mental retardation by genomewide oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization. Genomic imbalance is a major cause of developmental disorders. Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) has revealed frequent imbalances associated with clinical syndromes, but also a large number of copy number variations (CNVs), which have complicated the interpretation of results. We studied 100 consecutive patients with unexplained mental retardation and a normal karyotype using several platforms of CGH arrays. A genomewide array with 44,290 oligonucleotide probes (OaCGH44K) detected imbalances in 15% of cases studied with sizes ranged from 459 kb to 19 Mb while revealing a small number of CNVs (0.72/individual). Another platform with approximately 240,000 oligonucleotide probes (OaCGH244K) revealed a large number of CNVs (20/individual) in selected cases and their normal parents. We used a comprehensive approach for interpreting the results of aCGH, including consideration of the size, inheritance and gene content of CNVs, and consultation with an online Database of Genomic Variants (DGV) and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Men (OMIM) for information on the genes involved. Our study suggests that genomewide oligonucleotide arrays such as the OaCGH44K platform can be used as a powerful diagnostic tool for detection of genomic imbalances associated with unexplained mental retardation or syndromic autism spectrum disorders. It is interesting to note that a small number of common variants were revealed by OaCGH244K in some study subjects but not in their parents and that some inherited CNVs had altered breakpoints. Further investigations on these alterations may provide useful information for understanding the mechanism of CNVs.
17721928	Identification of the first germline mutation in the extracellular domain of the follitropin receptor responsible for spontaneous ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. The receptors for follitropin (FSHR), thyrotropin (TSHR), and lutropin/chorionic gonadotropin (LHCGR) are the members of the glycoprotein hormone (GPH) receptors (GPHR) family. They present a bipartite structure with a large extracellular amino-terminal domain (ECD), responsible for high-affinity hormone binding, and a carboxyl-terminal serpentine region, implicated in transduction of the activation signal. Spontaneous ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (sOHSS) is a rare genetic condition in which human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) promiscuously stimulates the FSHR during the first trimester of pregnancy. Surprisingly, germline FSHR mutations responsible for the disease have so far been found only in the transmembrane helices of the serpentine region of the FSHR, outside the hormone binding domain. When tested functionally, all mutants were abnormally sensitive to both hCG and thyrotropin (TSH) while displaying constitutive activity. This loss of ligand specificity was attributed to the lowering of an intramolecular barrier of activation rather than to an increase of binding affinity. Here we report the first germline mutation responsible for sOHSS (c.383C>A, p.Ser128Tyr), located in the ECD of the FSHR. Contrary to the mutations described previously, the p.Ser128Tyr FSHR mutant displayed increase in affinity and sensitivity toward hCG and did not show any constitutive activity, nor promiscuous activation by TSH. Thus, sOHSS can be achieved from different molecular mechanisms involving each functional domains of the FSHR. Based on the structure of the FSHR/FSH complex and site-directed mutagenesis studies, we provide robust molecular models for the GPH/GPHR complexes and we propose a molecular explanation to the binding characteristics of the p.Ser128Tyr mutant.
17879353	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1): analysis of 1336 mutations reported in the first decade following identification of the gene. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the occurrence of tumors of the parathyroids, pancreas, and anterior pituitary. The MEN1 gene, which was identified in 1997, consists of 10 exons that encode a 610-amino acid protein referred to as menin. Menin is predominantly a nuclear protein that has roles in transcriptional regulation, genome stability, cell division, and proliferation. Germline mutations usually result in MEN1 or occasionally in an allelic variant referred to as familial isolated hyperparathyroidism (FIHP). MEN1 tumors frequently have loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the MEN1 locus, which is consistent with a tumor suppressor role of MEN1. Furthermore, somatic abnormalities of MEN1 have been reported in MEN1 and non-MEN1 endocrine tumors. The clinical aspects and molecular genetics of MEN1 are reviewed together with the reported 1,336 mutations. The majority (>70%) of these mutations are predicted to lead to truncated forms of menin. The mutations are scattered throughout the>9-kb genomic sequence of the MEN1 gene. Four, which consist of c.249_252delGTCT (deletion at codons 83-84), c.1546_1547insC (insertion at codon 516), c.1378C>T (Arg460Ter), and c.628_631delACAG (deletion at codons 210-211) have been reported to occur frequently in 4.5%, 2.7%, 2.6%, and 2.5% of families, respectively. However, a comparison of the clinical features in patients and their families with the same mutations reveals an absence of phenotype-genotype correlations. The majority of MEN1 mutations are likely to disrupt the interactions of menin with other proteins and thereby alter critical events in cell cycle regulation and proliferation.
17918732	An integrated genetic and functional analysis of the role of type II transmembrane serine proteases (TMPRSSs) in hearing loss. Building on our discovery that mutations in the transmembrane serine protease, TMPRSS3, cause nonsyndromic deafness, we have investigated the contribution of other TMPRSS family members to the auditory function. To identify which of the 16 known TMPRSS genes had a strong likelihood of involvement in hearing function, three types of biological evidence were examined: 1) expression in inner ear tissues; 2) location in a genomic interval that contains a yet unidentified gene for deafness; and 3) evaluation of hearing status of any available Tmprss knockout mouse strains. This analysis demonstrated that, besides TMPRSS3, another TMPRSS gene was essential for hearing and, indeed, mice deficient for Hepsin (Hpn) also known as Tmprss1 exhibited profound hearing loss. In addition, TMPRSS2, TMPRSS5, and CORIN, also named TMPRSS10, showed strong likelihood of involvement based on their inner ear expression and mapping position within deafness loci PKSR7, DFNB24, and DFNB25, respectively. These four TMPRSS genes were then screened for mutations in affected members of the DFNB24 and DFNB25 deafness families, and in a cohort of 362 sporadic deaf cases. This large mutation screen revealed numerous novel sequence variations including three potential pathogenic mutations in the TMPRSS5 gene. The mutant forms of TMPRSS5 showed reduced or absent proteolytic activity. Subsequently, TMPRSS genes with evidence of involvement in deafness were further characterized, and their sites of expression were determined. Tmprss1, 3, and 5 proteins were detected in spiral ganglion neurons. Tmprss3 was also present in the organ of Corti. TMPRSS1 and 3 proteins appeared stably anchored to the endoplasmic reticulum membranes, whereas TMPRSS5 was also detected at the plasma membrane. Collectively, these results provide evidence that TMPRSS1 and TMPRSS3 play and TMPRSS5 may play important and specific roles in hearing.
18381613	A multicenter study on the prevalence and spectrum of mutations in the otoferlin gene (OTOF) in subjects with nonsyndromic hearing impairment and auditory neuropathy. Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing impairment (NSHI) is a heterogeneous condition, for which 53 genetic loci have been reported, and 29 genes have been identified to date. One of these, OTOF, encodes otoferlin, a membrane-anchored calcium-binding protein that plays a role in the exocytosis of synaptic vesicles at the auditory inner hair cell ribbon synapse. We have investigated the prevalence and spectrum of deafness-causing mutations in the OTOF gene. Cohorts of 708 Spanish, 83 Colombian, and 30 Argentinean unrelated subjects with autosomal recessive NSHI were screened for the common p.Gln829X mutation. In compound heterozygotes, the second mutant allele was identified by DNA sequencing. In total, 23 Spanish, two Colombian and two Argentinean subjects were shown to carry two mutant alleles of OTOF. Of these, one Colombian and 13 Spanish subjects presented with auditory neuropathy. In addition, a cohort of 20 unrelated subjects with a diagnosis of auditory neuropathy, from several countries, was screened for mutations in OTOF by DNA sequencing. A total of 11 of these subjects were shown to carry two mutant alleles of OTOF. In total, 18 pathogenic and four neutral novel alleles of the OTOF gene were identified. Haplotype analysis for markers close to OTOF suggests a common founder for the novel c.2905_2923delinsCTCCGAGCGCA mutation, frequently found in Argentina. Our results confirm that mutation of the OTOF gene correlates with a phenotype of prelingual, profound NSHI, and indicate that OTOF mutations are a major cause of inherited auditory neuropathy.
18429048	Haplotype analysis suggests a single Balkan origin for the Gaucher disease [D409H;H255Q] double mutant allele. Gaucher disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease that is mainly due to mutations in the GBA gene. Most of the mutant alleles described so far bear a single mutation. However, there are a few alleles bearing two or more DNA changes. It has been reported that patients homozygous for the [D409H;H255Q] double mutant allele (HGVS-approved nomenclature, p.[D448H;H294Q]) present a more severe phenotype than patients homozygous for the relatively common D409H mutation. In this study, we confirmed the detrimental cumulative effect of these two mutations at the enzymatic activity level by the heterologous expression of the single and double mutant alleles. Additionally, we found a high frequency of the [D409H;H255Q] allele in patients from the Balkans and the Adriatic area of Italy. This prompted us to perform a haplotype analysis, using five microsatellite polymorphisms close to the GBA gene, to determine the origin of this allele. The results of the 37 chromosomes analysed showed that most of them share a common haplotype and are consistent with a single origin in the Balkans and the Adriatic area of Italy for the [D409H;H255Q] allele.
18446851	Parkes Weber syndrome, vein of Galen aneurysmal malformation, and other fast-flow vascular anomalies are caused by RASA1 mutations. Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation (CM-AVM) is a newly recognized autosomal dominant disorder, caused by mutations in the RASA1 gene in six families. Here we report 42 novel RASA1 mutations and the associated phenotype in 44 families. The penetrance and de novo occurrence were high. All affected individuals presented multifocal capillary malformations (CMs), which represent the hallmark of the disorder. Importantly, one-third had fast-flow vascular lesions. Among them, we observed severe intracranial AVMs, including vein of Galen aneurysmal malformation, which were symptomatic at birth or during infancy, extracranial AVM of the face and extremities, and Parkes Weber syndrome (PKWS), previously considered sporadic and nongenetic. These fast-flow lesions can be differed from the other two genetic AVMs seen in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) and in phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) hamartomatous tumor syndrome. Finally, some CM-AVM patients had neural tumors reminiscent of neurofibromatosis type 1 or 2. This is the first extensive study on the phenotypes associated with RASA1 mutations, and unravels their wide heterogeneity.
18449911	Evaluation of in silico splice tools for decision-making in molecular diagnosis. It appears that all types of genomic nucleotide variations can be deleterious by affecting normal pre-mRNA splicing via disruption/creation of splice site consensus sequences. As it is neither pertinent nor realistic to perform functional testing for all of these variants, it is important to identify those that could lead to a splice defect in order to restrict transcript analyses to the most appropriate cases. Web-based tools designed to provide such predictions are available. We evaluated the performance of six of these tools (Splice Site Prediction by Neural Network [NNSplice], Splice-Site Finder [SSF], MaxEntScan [MES], Automated Splice-Site Analyses [ASSA], Exonic Splicing Enhancer [ESE] Finder, and Relative Enhancer and Silencer Classification by Unanimous Enrichment [RESCUE]-ESE) using 39 unrelated retinoblastoma patients carrying different RB1 variants (31 intronic and eight exonic). These 39 patients were screened for abnormal splicing using puromycin-treated cell lines and the results were compared to the predictions. As expected, 17 variants impacting canonical AG/GT splice sites were correctly predicted as deleterious. A total of 22 variations occurring at loosely defined positions (+/-60 nucleotides from an AG/GT site) led to a splice defect in 19 cases and 16 of them were classified as deleterious by at least one tool (84% sensitivity). In other words, three variants escaped in silico detection and the remaining three were correctly predicted as neutral. Overall our results suggest that a combination of complementary in silico tools is necessary to guide molecular geneticists (balance between the time and cost required by RNA analysis and the risk of missing a deleterious mutation) because the weaknesses of one in silico tool may be overcome by the results of another tool.
18454449	A meta-analysis of nonsense mutations causing human genetic disease. Nonsense mutations account for approximately 11% of all described gene lesions causing human inherited disease and approximately 20% of disease-associated single-basepair substitutions affecting gene coding regions. Pathological nonsense mutations resulting in TGA (38.5%), TAG (40.4%), and TAA (21.1%) occur in different proportions to naturally occurring stop codons. Of the 23 different nucleotide substitutions giving rise to nonsense mutations, the most frequent are CGA --> TGA (21%; resulting from methylation-mediated deamination) and CAG --> TAG (19%). The differing nonsense mutation frequencies are largely explicable in terms of variable nucleotide substitution rates such that it is unnecessary to invoke differential translational termination efficiency or differential codon usage. Some genes are characterized by numerous nonsense mutations but relatively few if any missense mutations (e.g., CHM) whereas other genes exhibit many missense mutations but few if any nonsense mutations (e.g., PSEN1). Genes in the latter category have a tendency to encode proteins characterized by multimer formation. Consistent with the operation of a clinical selection bias, genes exhibiting an excess of nonsense mutations are also likely to display an excess of frameshift mutations. Tumor suppressor (TS) genes exhibit a disproportionate number of nonsense mutations while most mutations in oncogenes are missense. A total of 12% of somatic nonsense mutations in TS genes were found to occur recurrently in the hypermutable CpG dinucleotide. In a comparison of somatic and germline mutational spectra for 17 TS genes, approximately 43% of somatic nonsense mutations had counterparts in the germline (rising to 98% for CpG mutations). Finally, the proportion of disease-causing nonsense mutations predicted to elicit nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is significantly higher (P=1.56 x 10(-9)) than among nonobserved (potential) nonsense mutations, implying that nonsense mutations that elicit NMD are more likely to come to clinical attention.
18521937	Mutations in CNGA3 impair trafficking or function of cone cyclic nucleotide-gated channels, resulting in achromatopsia. CNGA3 encodes the A-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channel, which is a crucial component of the phototransduction cascade in cone outer segments. Mutations in the CNGA3 gene have been associated with complete and incomplete forms of achromatopsia (ACHR), a congenital, autosomal recessively inherited retinal disorder characterized by lack of color discrimination, reduced visual acuity, nystagmus, and photophobia. Here we report the identification of three novel CNGA3 missense mutations in ACHR patients: c.682G>A (p.E228 K), c.1315C>T (p.R439W), and c.1405G>A (p.A469 T), and the detailed functional analyses of these new as well as five previously reported mutations (R283Q, T291R, F547L, G557R, and E590 K), in conjunction with clinical data of patients carrying these mutations, to establish genotype-phenotype correlations. The functional characterization of mutant CNGA3 channels was performed with calcium imaging and patch clamp recordings in a heterologous HEK293 cell expression system. Results were corroborated by immunostaining and colocalization experiments of the channel protein with the plasma membrane. Several mutations evoked pronounced alterations of the apparent cGMP sensitivity of mutant channels. These functional defects were fully or partially compensated by coexpressing the mutant CNGA3 subunit with the wild-type CNGB3 subunit for channels with the mutations R439W, A469 T, F547L, and E590 K. We could show that several mutant channels with agonist dose-response relationships similar to the wild-type exhibited severely impaired membrane targeting. In addition, this study presents the positive effect of reduced cell culture temperature on surface expression and functional performance of mutant CNG channels with protein folding or trafficking defects.
18683858	Ancestry informative marker sets for determining continental origin and admixture proportions in common populations in America. To provide a resource for assessing continental ancestry in a wide variety of genetic studies, we identified, validated, and characterized a set of 128 ancestry informative markers (AIMs). The markers were chosen for informativeness, genome-wide distribution, and genotype reproducibility on two platforms (TaqMan assays and Illumina arrays). We analyzed genotyping data from 825 subjects with diverse ancestry, including European, East Asian, Amerindian, African, South Asian, Mexican, and Puerto Rican. A comprehensive set of 128 AIMs and subsets as small as 24 AIMs are shown to be useful tools for ascertaining the origin of subjects from particular continents, and to correct for population stratification in admixed population sample sets. Our findings provide general guidelines for the application of specific AIM subsets as a resource for wide application. We conclude that investigators can use TaqMan assays for the selected AIMs as a simple and cost efficient tool to control for differences in continental ancestry when conducting association studies in ethnically diverse populations.
18726931	FOXL2 mutations and genomic rearrangements in BPES. The FOXL2 gene is one of 10 forkhead genes, the mutations of which lead to human developmental disorders, often with ocular manifestations. Mutations in FOXL2 are known to cause blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), an autosomal dominant eyelid malformation associated (type I) or not (type II) with ovarian dysfunction, leading to premature ovarian failure (POF). In addition, a few mutations have been described in patients with isolated POF. Here, we review all currently described FOXL2 sequence variations and genomic rearrangements in BPES and POF. Using a combined mutation detection approach, it is possible to identify the underlying genetic defect in a major proportion (88%) of typical BPES patients. Of all genetic defects found in our BPES cohort, intragenic mutations represent 81%. They include missense changes, frameshift and nonsense mutations, in-frame deletions, and duplications, that are distributed along the single-exon gene. Genomic rearrangements comprising both deletions encompassing FOXL2 and deletions located outside its transcription unit, represent 12% and 5% of all genetic defects in our BPES cohort, respectively. One of the challenges of genetic testing in BPES is the establishment of genotype-phenotype correlations, mainly with respect to the ovarian phenotype. Genetic testing should be performed in the context of genetic counseling, however, and should be systematically complemented by a multidisciplinary clinical follow-up. Another challenge for health care professionals involved in BPES is the treatment of the eyelid phenotype and the prevention or treatment of POF.
18752264	Ethnically diverse causes of Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS): FCMD mutations are a more common cause of WWS outside of the Middle East. Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS) is a genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disease characterized by congenital muscular dystrophy, cobblestone lissencephaly, and ocular malformations. Mutations in six genes involved in the glycosylation of á-dystroglycan (POMT1, POMT2, POMGNT1, FCMD, FKRP and LARGE) have been identified in WWS patients, but account for only a portion of WWS cases. To better understand the genetics of WWS and establish the frequency and distribution of mutations across WWS genes, we genotyped all known loci in a cohort of 43 WWS patients of varying geographical and ethnic origin. Surprisingly, we reached a molecular diagnosis for 40% of our patients and found mutations in POMT1, POMT2, FCMD and FKRP, many of which were novel alleles, but no mutations in POMGNT1 or LARGE. Notably, the FCMD gene was a more common cause of WWS than previously expected in the European/American subset of our cohort, including all Ashkenazi Jewish cases, who carried the same founder mutation.
18767143	The FBN2 gene: new mutations, locus-specific database (Universal Mutation Database FBN2), and genotype-phenotype correlations. Congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA) is an extremely rare disease, due to mutations in the FBN2 gene encoding fibrillin-2. Another member of the fibrillin family, the FBN1 gene, is involved in a broad phenotypic continuum of connective-tissue disorders including Marfan syndrome. Identifying not only what is in common but also what differentiates these two proteins should enable us to better comprehend their respective functions and better understand the multitude of diseases in which these two genes are involved. In 1995 we created a locus-specific database (LSDB) for FBN1 mutations with the Universal Mutation Database (UMD) tool. To facilitate comparison of identified mutations in these two genes and search for specific functional areas, we created an LSDB for the FBN2 gene: the UMD-FBN2 database. This database lists 26 published and six newly identified mutations that mainly comprise missense and splice-site mutations. Although the number of described FBN2 mutations was low, the frequency of joint dislocation was significantly higher with missense mutations when compared to splice site mutations.
19058223	Mutational profiling of cancer candidate genes in glioblastoma, melanoma and pancreatic carcinoma reveals a snapshot of their genomic landscapes. A recent systematic analysis of 18.191 well annotated coding sequences (RefSeq) in breast and colorectal cancers has led to the identification of somatic mutations in 1.718 genes (Wood et al., 2007). Based on statistical parameters 280 of these have been denominated candidate cancer (CAN) genes. This analysis has provided an interesting snapshot of the landscape of tumor genomes by showing that they contain a few frequently mutated genes (denominated 'mountains'). On the contrary, the large majority of CAN genes are altered at low frequency (designated 'hills'). Whether 'hill' type CAN genes are tumor specific is largely unknown. To address this question we evaluated the mutational profiles of 27 'hill' CAN genes in glioblastoma, melanoma and pancreatic carcinoma by sequencing the exons previously found mutated by Wood and colleagues. Only 4 of the breast/colorectal 'hill' type CAN genes (SMAD4, MYO18B, NAV3 and MMP2) were also mutated in melanoma and pancreatic carcinoma, while none was altered in glioblastoma. These results suggest that 'hill' type CAN genes are not frequently shared by different tumor types and that their mutation patterns are tissue specific. Tumor-specific genome wide mutational profiling will be required to identify 'hill' type CAN genes that characterize the genomic landscapes of each cancer lineage.
19191333	Functional characterization of ryanodine receptor (RYR1) sequence variants using a metabolic assay in immortalized B-lymphocytes. Mutations in the RYR1 gene are linked to malignant hyperthermia (MH), central core disease and multi-minicore disease. We screened by DHPLC the RYR1 gene in 24 subjects for mutations, and characterized functional alterations caused by some RYR1 variants. Three novel sequence variants and twenty novel polymorphisms were identified. Immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines from patients with RYR1 variants and from controls were stimulated with 4-chloro-m-cresol (4-CmC) and the rate of extracellular acidification was recorded. We demonstrate that the increased acidification rate of lymphoblastoid cells in response to 4-CmC is mainly due to RYR1 activation. Cells expressing RYR1 variants in the N-terminal and in the central region of the protein (p.Arg530His, p.Arg2163Pro, p.Asn2342Ser, p.Glu2371Gly and p.Arg2454His) displayed higher activity compared with controls; this could account for the MH-susceptible phenotype. Cell lines harboring RYR1(Cys4664Arg) were significantly less activated by 4-CmC. This result indicates that the p.Cys4664Arg variant causes a leaky channel and depletion of intracellular stores. The functional changes detected corroborate the variants analyzed as disease-causing alterations and the acidification rate measurements as a means to monitor Ca(2+)-induced metabolic changes in cells harboring mutant RYR1 channels.
19370757	An update on mutations of the SLC39A4 gene in acrodermatitis enteropathica. Acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE) is a very rare inherited recessive disease caused by severe zinc deficiency. It typically occurs in early infancy and is characterized by periorificial and acral dermatitis, alopecia, and diarrhea. In 2002, both we and others identified the AE SLC39A4 gene located at 8q24.3, and described the first causative mutations for the disease. The SLC39A4 gene encodes a zinc-specific transporter belonging to the Zinc/Iron-regulated transporter-like family, which is highly expressed in the duodenum and jejunum. The SLC39A4 mutations are spread over the entire gene and include many different types of mutations. We report here the identification of five novel variants, including three likely pathogenic mutations. Since the first description, 31 mutations or unclassified variants of SLC39A4 have been reported in this gene. Although most of the patients with AE carry homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations, some of them have either no SLC39A4 mutation or only a monoallelic mutation. Thus, a genotype-phenotype correlation is not easily defined for all AE patients, and the molecular basis of the disease could be more complex than previously described. In cases unexplained by current genetic analyses, the most plausible molecular causes could be a dysregulation of the SLC39A4 gene transcription -- involving either metal response elements (MREs) or a modifier gene -- or the existence of another putative AE gene. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge of SLC39A4 mutations, as well as the future prospects to fully unravel the pathogenesis of AE.
19462467	Molecular profiling of the "plexinome" in melanoma and pancreatic cancer. Plexins are transmembrane high-affinity receptors for semaphorins, regulating cell guidance, motility, and invasion. Functional evidences implicate semaphorin signals in cancer progression and metastasis. Yet, it is largely unknown whether plexin genes are genetically altered in human tumors. We performed a comprehensive gene copy analysis and mutational profiling of all nine members of the plexin gene family (plexinome), in melanomas and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs), which are characterized by high metastatic potential and poor prognosis. Gene copy analysis detected amplification of PLXNA4 in melanomas, whereas copy number losses of multiple plexin genes were seen in PDACs. Somatic mutations were detected in PLXNA4, PLXNB3, and PLXNC1; providing the first evidence that these plexins are mutated in human cancer. Functional assays in cellular models revealed that some of these missense mutations result in loss of plexin function. For instance, c.1613G>A, p.R538H mutation in the extracellular domain of PLXNB3 prevented binding of the ligand Sema5A. Moreover, although PLXNA4 signaling can inhibit tumor cell migration, the mutated c.5206C>T, p.H1736Y allele had lost this activity. Our study is the first systematic analysis of the "plexinome" in human tumors, and indicates that multiple mutated plexins may be involved in cancer progression.
19626718	Insights into the importance of miRNA-related polymorphisms to heart disease.
19718767	NR2E3 mutations in enhanced S-cone sensitivity syndrome (ESCS), Goldmann-Favre syndrome (GFS), clumped pigmentary retinal degeneration (CPRD), and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). NR2E3, also called photoreceptor-specific nuclear receptor (PNR), is a transcription factor of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily whose expression is uniquely restricted to photoreceptors. There, its physiological activity is essential for proper rod and cone photoreceptor development and maintenance. Thirty-two different mutations in NR2E3 have been identified in either homozygous or compound heterozygous state in the recessively inherited enhanced S-cone sensitivity syndrome (ESCS), Goldmann-Favre syndrome (GFS), and clumped pigmentary retinal degeneration (CPRD). The clinical phenotype common to all these patients is night blindness, rudimental or absent rod function, and hyperfunction of the "blue" S-cones. A single p.G56R mutation is inherited in a dominant manner and causes retinitis pigmentosa (RP). We have established a new locus-specific database for NR2E3 (www.LOVD.nl/eye), containing all reported mutations, polymorphisms, and unclassified sequence variants, including novel ones. A high proportion of mutations are located in the evolutionarily-conserved DNA-binding domains (DBDs) and ligand-binding domains (LBDs) of NR2E3. Based on homology modeling of these NR2E3 domains, we propose a structural localization of mutated residues. The high variability of clinical phenotypes observed in patients affected by NR2E3-linked retinal degenerations may be caused by different disease mechanisms, including absence of DNA-binding, altered interactions with transcriptional coregulators, and differential activity of modifier genes.
19842213	Shadow autozygosity mapping by linkage exclusion (SAMPLE): a simple strategy to identify the genetic basis of lethal autosomal recessive disorders. Autozygosity mapping has been invaluable for determining the genetic basis of lethal autosomal recessive disorders, but this approach remains challenging because DNA from affected individuals may often be unavailable or of insufficient quality for extensive molecular genetic studies. To circumvent these difficulties, we developed a computer program called "SAMPLE" (for shadow autozygosity mapping by linkage exclusion) to enhance autozygosity mapping through the empirical analysis of haplotypes of unaffected individuals in consanguineous families. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping of unaffected individuals in complex consanguineous pedigrees is used to infer limited chromosomal regions compatible with linkage to a potential disease locus, and to allow the immediate prioritization of potential regions of interest. Further limited genotyping then enables the rapid confirmation and fine mapping of a disease locus. We demonstrate the utility of this strategy by using genotyping data from only parents and unaffected siblings, in three consanguineous families affected with Meckel-Gruber syndrome, to correctly infer the location of the MKS3/TMEM67 locus on chromosome 8q22.1. This strategy is practicable only with the recent advances in whole genome genotyping by high-density SNP microarrays, and could not be easily implemented in approaches that rely on microsatellite markers. SAMPLE is available at http://dna.leeds.ac.uk/sample/.
19847796	Evaluation of SNPs in miR-146a, miR196a2 and miR-499 as low-penetrance alleles in German and Italian familial breast cancer cases. Recently, the SNPs rs11614913 in hsa-mir-196a2 and rs3746444 in hsa-mir-499 were reported to be associated with increased breast cancer risk, and the SNP rs2910164 in hsa-mir-146a was shown to have an effect on age of breast cancer diagnosis. In order to further investigate the effect of these SNPs, we genotyped a total of 1894 breast cancer cases negative for disease-causing mutations or unclassified variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2, and 2760 controls from Germany and Italy. We compared the genotype and allele frequencies of rs2910164, rs11614913 and rs3746444 in cases versus controls of the German and Italian series, and of the two series combined; we also investigated the effect of the three SNPs on age at breast cancer diagnosis. None of the performed analyses showed statistically significant results. In conclusion, our data suggested lack of association between SNPs rs2910164, rs11614913 and rs3746444 and breast cancer risk, or age at breast cancer onset.
20052763	Ex vivo splicing assays of mutations at noncanonical positions of splice sites in USHER genes. Molecular diagnosis in Usher syndrome type 1 and 2 patients led to the identification of 21 sequence variations located in noncanonical positions of splice sites in MYO7A, CDH23, USH1C, and USH2A genes. To establish experimentally the splicing pattern of these substitutions, whose impact on splicing is not always predictable by available softwares, ex vivo splicing assays were performed. The branch-point mapping strategy was also used to investigate further a putative branch-point mutation in USH2A intron 43. Aberrant splicing was demonstrated for 16 of the 21 (76.2%) tested sequence variations. The mutations resulted more frequently in activation of a nearby cryptic splice site or use of a de novo splice site than exon skipping (37.5%). This study allowed the reclassification as splicing mutations of one silent (c.7872G>A (p.Glu2624Glu) in CDH23) and four missense mutations (c.2993G>A (p.Arg998Lys) in USH2A, c.592G>A (p.Ala198Thr), c.3503G>C [p.Arg1168Pro], c.5944G>A (p.Gly1982Arg) in MYO7A), whereas it provided clues about a role in structure/function in four other cases: c.802G>A (p.Gly268Arg), c.653T>A (p.Val218Glu) (USH2A), and c.397C>T (p.His133Tyr), c.3502C>T (p.Arg1168Trp) (MYO7A). Our data provide insights into the contribution of splicing mutations in Usher genes and illustrate the need to define accurately their splicing outcome for diagnostic purposes.
20127982	Disruption of OTC promoter-enhancer interaction in a patient with symptoms of ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency. In a female patient with signs of ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency (OTCD), the only variation found was a heterozygous single nucleotide substitution c.-366A>G. Determination of transcription start sites of human OTC 95, 119 and 169 bp upstream of the initiation codon located the variation upstream of the 5'-untranslated region. We predicted the human promoter and enhancer elements from homology with rat and mouse, performed function analysis of both regulatory regions and assessed the impact of the promoter variation in functional studies using dual luciferase reporter assay. Our data indicate that: (i) Full transcriptional activity of human OTC promoter depends on an upstream enhancer, as do the rodent promoters. (ii) The promoter variation c.-366A>G does not affect the function of the promoter alone but it disrupts the interaction of the promoter with the enhancer. (iii) The promoter-enhancer interaction contributes to tissue specific expression of OTC in the liver. We conclude that mutations in the regulatory regions of OTC can lead to OTCD and should be included in genetic testing.
20186687	Loss-of-function of MYO5B is the main cause of microvillus inclusion disease: 15 novel mutations and a CaCo-2 RNAi cell model. Autosomal recessive microvillus inclusion disease (MVID) is characterized by an intractable diarrhea starting within the first few weeks of life. The hallmarks of MVID are a lack of microvilli on the surface of villous enterocytes, occurrence of intracellular vacuoles lined by microvilli (microvillus inclusions), and the cytoplasmic accumulation of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive vesicles in enterocytes. Recently, we identified mutations in MYO5B, encoding the unconventional type Vb myosin motor protein, in a first cohort of nine MVID patients. In this study, we identified 15 novel nonsense and missense mutations in MYO5B in 11 unrelated MVID patients. Fluorescence microscopy, Western blotting, and electron microscopy were applied to analyze the effects of MYO5B siRNA knock-down in polarized, brush border possessing CaCo-2 cells. Loss of surface microvilli, increased formation of microvillus inclusions, and subapical enrichment of PAS-positive endomembrane compartments were induced in polarized, filter-grown CaCo-2 cells, following MYO5B knock-down. Our data indicate that MYO5B mutations are a major cause of microvillus inclusion disease and that MYO5B knock-down recapitulates most of the cellular phenotype in vitro, thus independently showing loss of MYO5B function as the cause of microvillus inclusion disease.
20333758	Functional analysis of mutations in the ATP loop of the Wilson disease copper transporter, ATP7B. Wilson disease (WND) is an autosomal recessive disorder resulting from mutation of ATP7B. Transport of copper by ATP7B from the trans-Golgi of hepatocytes into apical membrane-trafficked vesicles for excretion in the bile is the major means of copper elimination from the body. Although copper is an essential nutrient, homeostasis must be carefully maintained. If homeostasis is disrupted, copper can accumulate within the liver, kidney, cornea, and/or brain. The range of organs affected leads to clinical heterogeneity and difficulty in WND diagnosis. Sequencing of ATP7B is an important adjunct for diagnosis but has led to the discovery of many novel missense variants. Although prediction programs are available, functional characterization is essential for determining the consequence of novel variants. We have tested 12 missense variants localized to the ATP loop of ATP7B and compared three predictive programs (SIFT, PolyPhen, and Align-GVGD). We found p.L1043P, p.G1000R, p.G1101R, p.I1102T, p.V1239G, and p.D1267V deleterious; p.G1176E and p.G1287S intermediate; p.E1173G temperature sensitive; p.T991M and p.I1148T mild; and p.R1228T functioning as wild type. We found that SIFT most often agreed with functional data (92%), compared with PolyPhen (83%) and Align-GVGD (67%). We conclude that variants found to negatively affect function likely contribute to the WND phenotype in patients.
20506298	Dissecting the pathogenic mechanisms of mutations in the pore region of the human cone photoreceptor cyclic nucleotide-gated channel. The CNGA3 gene encodes the A3 subunit of the cone photoreceptor cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channel, an essential component of the phototransduction cascade. Certain mutations in CNGA3 cause autosomal recessive achromatopsia, a retinal disorder characterized by severely reduced visual acuity, lack of color discrimination, photophobia, and nystagmus. We identified three novel mutations in the pore-forming region of CNGA3 (L363P, G367V, and E376K) in patients diagnosed with achromatopsia. We assessed the expression and function of channels with these three new and two previously described mutations (S341P and P372S) in a heterologous HEK293 cell expression system using Western blot, subcellular localization on the basis of immunocytochemistry, calcium imaging, and patch clamp recordings. In this first comparative functional analysis of disease-associated mutations in the pore of a CNG channel, we found impaired surface expression of S341P, L363P, and P372S mutants and reduced macroscopic currents for channels with the mutations S341P, G367V, and E376K. Calcium imaging and patch clamp experiments after incubation at 37 degrees C revealed nonfunctional homo- and heteromeric channels in all five mutants, but incubation at 27 degrees C combined with coexpression of the B3 subunit restored residual function of channels with the mutations S341P, G367V, and E376K.
20506408	Functionality of sequence variants in the genes coding for the low-density lipoprotein receptor and apolipoprotein B in individuals with inherited hypercholesterolemia. Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) have elevated LDL-C levels, usually above the 90th percentile (P90) for age and gender. However, large-scale genetic cascade screening for FH showed that 15% of the LDL-receptor (LDLR) or Apolipoprotein B (APOB) mutation carriers have LDL-C levels below P75. Nonpathogenicity of sequence changes may explain this phenomenon. To assess pathogenicity of a mutation we proposed three criteria: (1) mean LDL-C 4P75 in untreated mutation carriers; (2) higher mean LDL-C level in untreated carriers than in untreated noncarriers; and (3) higher percentage of medication users in carriers than in noncarriers at screening. We considered a mutation nonpathogenic when none of the three criteria were met. We applied these criteria to mutations that had been determined in more than 50 untreated adults. Segregation analysis was performed to confirm nonpathogenicity. Forty-six mutations had been tested in more than 50 untreated subjects, and three were nonpathogenic according to our criteria: one in LDLR (c.108C4A, exon 2) and two in APOB (c.13154T4C and c.13181T4C, both in exon 29). Segregation analysis also indicated nonpathogenicity. According to our criteria, three sequence variants were nonpathogenic. The criteria may help to identify nonpathogenic sequence changes in genetic cascade screening programs.
20607857	UMD-CFTR: a database dedicated to CF and CFTR-related disorders. With the increasing knowledge of cystic fibrosis (CF) and CFTR-related diseases (CFTR-RD), the number of sequence variations in the CFTR gene is constantly raising. CF and particularly CFTR-RD provide a particular challenge because of many unclassified variants and identical genotypes associated with different phenotypes. Using the Universal Mutation Database (UMD) software we have constructed UMD-CFTR (freely available at the URL: http://www.umd.be/CFTR/), the first comprehensive relational CFTR database that allows an in-depth analysis and annotation of all variations identified in individuals whose CFTR genes have been analyzed extensively. The system has been tested on the molecular data from 757 patients (540 CF and 217 CBAVD) including disease-causing, unclassified, and nonpathogenic alterations (301 different sequence variations) representing 3,973 entries. Tools are provided to assess the pathogenicity of mutations. UMD-CFTR also offers a number of query tools and graphical views providing instant access to the list of mutations, their frequencies, positions and predicted consequences, or correlations between genotypes, haplotypes, and phenotypes. UMD-CFTR offers a way to compile not only disease-causing genotypes but also haplotypes. It will help the CFTR scientific and medical communities to improve sequence variation interpretation, evaluate the putative influence of haplotypes on mutations, and correlate molecular data with phenotypes.
20652909	A custom 148 gene-based resequencing chip and the SNP explorer software: new tools to study antibody deficiency. Hyper-IgM syndrome and Common Variable Immunodeficiency are heterogeneous disorders characterized by a predisposition to serious infection and impaired or absent neutralizing antibody responses. Although a number of single gene defects have been associated with these immune deficiency disorders, the genetic basis of many cases is not known. To facilitate mutation screening in patients with these syndromes, we have developed a custom 300-kb resequencing array, the Hyper-IgM/CVID chip, which interrogates 1,576 coding exons and intron-exon junction regions from 148 genes implicated in B-cell development and immunoglobulin isotype switching. Genomic DNAs extracted from patients were hybridized to the array using a high-throughput protocol for target sequence amplification, pooling, and hybridization. A Web-based application, SNP Explorer, was developed to directly analyze and visualize the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) annotation and for quality filtering. Several mutations in known disease-susceptibility genes such as CD40LG, TNFRSF13B, IKBKG, AICDA, as well as rare nucleotide changes in other genes such as TRAF3IP2, were identified in patient DNA samples and validated by direct sequencing. We conclude that the Hyper-IgM/CVID chip combined with SNP Explorer may provide a cost-effective tool for high-throughput discovery of novel mutations among hundreds of disease-relevant genes in patients with inherited antibody deficiency.
20672374	Experience with carrier screening and prenatal diagnosis for 16 Ashkenazi Jewish genetic diseases. The success of prenatal carrier screening as a disease prevention strategy in the Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) population has driven the expansion of screening panels as disease-causing founder mutations have been identified. However, the carrier frequencies of many of these mutations have not been reported in large AJ cohorts. We determined the carrier frequencies of over 100 mutations for 16 recessive disorders in the New York metropolitan area AJ population. Among the 100% AJ-descended individuals, screening for 16 disorders resulted in ∼1 in 3.3 being a carrier for one disease and ∼1 in 24 for two diseases. The carrier frequencies ranged from 0.066 (1 in 15.2; Gaucher disease) to 0.006 (1 in 168; nemaline myopathy), which averaged ∼15% higher than those for all screenees. Importantly, over 95% of screenees chose to be screened for all possible AJ diseases, including disorders with lower carrier frequencies and/or detectability. Carrier screening also identified rare individuals homozygous for disease-causing mutations who had previously unrecognized clinical manifestations. Additionally, prenatal testing results and experience for all 16 disorders (n = 574) are reported. Together, these data indicate the general acceptance, carrier frequencies, and prenatal testing results for an expanded panel of 16 diseases in the AJ population.
21280151	Searching for the missing heritability of complex diseases.
21394829	WAVe: web analysis of the variome. DNA sequence variation is the underlying basis of common human traits and rarer single-gene disorders. Understanding the variome, the variants in an individual's genome, is essential to enable the ultimate goals of personalized medicine. This critical research field has grown dramatically in recent years, mostly due to the spread and development of genotyping technologies. Despite these activities being promoted by the Human Genome Variation Society and projects such as the Human Variome Project or the European GEN2PHEN Project, variome data-integration systems are far from being widely used in the research community workflow. Most of ongoing research is focused on improving locus-specific databases. Although the quality and manual curation of LSDBs adds true value to this domain, they are often narrow, heterogeneous, and independent systems. This hampers data harmonization and interoperability between systems, stifling the aggregation of data from LSDBs and related data sources. A new platform entitled Web Analysis of the Variome, WAVe, is introduced. It offers direct and programmatic access to multiple locus-specific databases, with the integration of genetic variation datasets and enrichment with relevant information. WAVe's agile and innovative Web interface is accessible at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/WAVe.
21394830	A mild neurofibromatosis type 1 phenotype produced by the combination of the benign nature of a leaky NF1-splice mutation and the presence of a complex mosaicism. Here we analyze the genetic and molecular basis responsible for a very benign phenotype observed in an NF1 patient. Quantification of cells carrying the NF1 mutation in different samples derived from the three embryonic layers revealed mosaicism. Furthermore, the construction of a minigene with patient's mutation (c.3198 - 314G>A) confirmed its benign nature due to the leakiness of the splicing mechanism that generated a proportion of correctly spliced transcripts. Hence, we concluded that the mild phenotype observed in this patient is the result of the presence of mosaicism together with the benign nature of a leaky NF1-splice mutation. Finally, with the aim of developing a personalized therapeutic approach for this patient, we demonstrated correction of the splicing defect by using specific antisense morpholino oligomers. Our results provide an example of the molecular complexity behind disease phenotypes and highlight the importance of using comprehensive genetic approaches to better assess phenotype-genotype correlations.
21412943	Novel C2orf71 mutations account for ∼1% of cases in a large French arRP cohort. Autosomal-recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP) is a genetically heterogeneous group of disorders to which a novel gene, C2orf71, was recently associated. The purpose of our study was to establish the prevalence and nature of C2orf71 mutations in a clinically well-characterized cohort of 345 sporadic and arRP French cases. Direct sequencing of C2orf71 was performed in 209 subjects for whom mutations had previously been excluded by microarray technology and direct sequencing of EYS. Putative pathogenicity of the identified variants was evaluated through co-segregation analysis, screening of more than 188 control chromosomes and prediction programs. We identified two patients compound heterozygous for mutations predicted to lead to a premature stop codon, 3 of which are novel. In addition, 3 patients carried a single variant of likely pathogenicity. Furthermore a large number of novel putative non-disease causing variants were identified, highlighting the extremely polymorphic nature of C2orf71. To our knowledge, our study provides the first large scale screening of C2orf71 in a French arRP cohort through direct sequencing and suggests that it would account for approximately 1% of arRP cases.
21412948	SNP uniqueness problem: a proof-of-principle in HapMap SNPs. SNP-based research strongly affects our biomedical and clinically associated knowledge. Nonunique and false-positive SNP existence in commonly used datasets may thus lead to biased, inaccurate clinically associated conclusions. We designed a computational study to reveal the degree of nonunique/false-positive SNPs in the HapMap dataset. Two sets of SNP flanking sequences were used as queries for BLAT analysis against the human genome. 4.2% and 11.9% of HapMap SNPs align to the genome nonuniquely (long and short, respectively). Furthermore, an average of 7.9% nonunique SNPs are included in common commercial genotyping arrays (according to our designed probes). Nonunique SNPs identified in this study are represented to various degrees in clinically associated databases, stressing the consequence of inaccurate SNP annotation and hence SNP utilization. Unfortunately, our results question some disease-related genotyping analyses, raising a worrisome concern on their validity.
21412953	Breakage-fusion-bridge cycles leading to inv dup del occur in human cleavage stage embryos. Recently, a high incidence of chromosome instability (CIN) was reported in human cleavage stage embryos. Based on the copy number changes that were observed in the blastomeres it was hypothesized that chromosome breakages and fusions occur frequently in cleavage stage human embryos and instigate subsequent breakage-fusion-bridge cycles. In addition, it was hypothesized that the DNA breaks present in spermatozoa could trigger this CIN. To test these hypotheses, we genotyped both parents as well as 93 blastomeres from 24 IVF embryos and developed a novel single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array-based algorithm to determine the parental origin of (aberrant) loci in single cells. Paternal as well as maternal alleles were commonly rearranged in the blastomeres indicating that sperm-specific DNA breaks do not explain the majority of these structural variants. The parent-of-origin analyses together with microarray-guided FISH analyses demonstrate the presence of inv dup del chromosomes as well as more complex rearrangements. These data provide unequivocal evidence for breakage-fusion-bridge cycles in those embryos and suggest that the human cleavage stage embryo is a major source of chromosomal disorders.
21786366	Exome sequencing identifies MRPL3 mutation in mitochondrial cardiomyopathy. By combining exome sequencing in conjunction with genetic mapping, we have identified the first mutation in large mitochondrial ribosomal protein MRPL3 in a family of four sibs with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, psychomotor retardation, and multiple respiratory chain deficiency. Affected sibs were compound heterozygotes for a missense MRPL3 mutation (P317R) and a large-scale deletion, inherited from the mother and the father, respectively. These mutations were shown to alter ribosome assembly and cause a mitochondrial translation deficiency in cultured skin fibroblasts resulting in an abnormal assembly of several complexes of the respiratory chain. This observation gives support to the view that exome sequencing combined with genetic mapping is a powerful approach for the identification of new genes of mitochondrial disorders.
21882294	SgD-CNV, a database for common and rare copy number variants in three Asian populations. Copy number variants (CNVs) extend our understanding of the genetic diversity in humans. However, the distribution and characteristics of CNVs in Asian populations remain largely unexplored, especially for rare CNVs that have emerged as important genetic factors for complex traits. In the present study, we performed an in-depth investigation of common and rare CNVs across 8,148 individuals from the three major Asian ethnic groups: Chinese (n = 1,945), Malays (n = 2,399), and Indians (n = 2,217) in Singapore, making this investigation the most comprehensive genome-wide survey of CNVs outside the European-ancestry populations to date. We detected about 16 CNVs per individual and the ratio of loss to gain events is ∼2:1. The majority of the CNVs are of low frequency (<10%), and 40% are rare (<1%). In each population, ∼20% of the CNVs are not previously catalogued in the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV). Contrary to findings from European studies, the common CNVs (>5%) in our populations are not well tagged by SNPs in Illumina 1M and 610K arrays, and most disease-associated common CNVs previously reported in Caucasians are rare in our populations. We also report noticeable population differentiation in the CNV landscape of these Asian populations, with the greatest diversity seen between the Indians and the Chinese.
21898660	Dilated cardiomyopathy-associated BAG3 mutations impair Z-disc assembly and enhance sensitivity to apoptosis in cardiomyocytes. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by dilation of left ventricular cavity with systolic dysfunction. Clinical symptom of DCM is heart failure, often associated with cardiac sudden death. About 20-35% of DCM patients have apparent family histories and it has been revealed that mutations in genes for sarcomere proteins cause DCM. However, the disease-causing mutations can be found only in about 17% of Japanese patients with familial DCM. Bcl-2-associated athanogene 3 (BAG3) is a co-chaperone protein with antiapoptotic function, which localizes at Z-disc in the striated muscles. Recently, BAG3 gene mutations in DCM patients were reported, but the functional abnormalities caused by the mutations are not fully unraveled. In this study, we analyzed 72 Japanese familial DCM patients for mutations in BAG3 and found two mutations, p.Arg218Trp and p.Leu462Pro, in two cases of adult-onset DCM without skeletal myopathy, which were absent from 400 control subjects. Functional studies at the cellular level revealed that the DCM-associated BAG3 mutations impaired the Z-disc assembly and increased the sensitivities to stress-induced apoptosis. These observations suggested that BAG3 mutations present in 2.8% of Japanese familial DCM patients caused DCM possibly by interfering with Z-disc assembly and inducing apoptotic cell death under the metabolic stress.
21901788	Estimating the degree of identity by descent in consanguineous couples. In some clinical and research settings, it is often necessary to identify the true level of "identity by descent" (IBD) between two individuals. However, as the individuals become more distantly related, it is increasingly difficult to accurately calculate this value. Consequently, we have developed a computer program that uses genome-wide SNP genotype data from related individuals to estimate the size and extent of IBD in their genomes. In addition, the software can compare a couple's IBD regions with either the autozygous regions of a relative affected by an autosomal recessive disease of unknown cause, or the IBD regions in the parents of the affected relative. It is then possible to calculate the probability of one of the couple's children suffering from the same disease. The software works by finding SNPs that exclude any possible IBD and then identifies regions that lack these SNPs, while exceeding a minimum size and number of SNPs. The accuracy of the algorithm was established by estimating the pairwise IBD between different members of a large pedigree with varying known coefficients of genetic relationship (CGR).
21922597	Fine-tiling array CGH to improve diagnostics for α- and β-thalassemia rearrangements. Implementation of multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for thalassemia causing deletions has lead to the detection of new rearrangements. Knowledge of the exact breakpoint sequences should give more insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying these rearrangements, and would facilitate the design of gap-PCRs. We have designed a custom fine-tiling array with oligonucleotides covering the complete globin gene clusters. We hybridized 27 DNA samples containing newly identified deletions and nine positive controls. We designed specific primers to amplify relatively short fragments containing the breakpoint sequence and analyzed these by direct sequencing. Results from nine positive controls showed that array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is suitable to detect small and large rearrangements. We were able to locate all breakpoints to a region of approximately 2 kb. We designed breakpoint primers for 22 cases and amplification was successful in 19 cases. For 12 of these, the exact locations of the breakpoints were determined. Seven of these deletions have not been reported before. aCGH is a valuable tool for high-resolution breakpoint characterization. The combination of MLPA and aCGH has lead to relatively cheap and easy to perform PCR assays, which might be of use for laboratories as an alternative for MLPA in populations where only a limited number of specific deletions occur with high frequency.
22052681	A novel mutation impairing the tertiary structure and stability of γC-crystallin (CRYGC) leads to cataract formation in humans and zebrafish lens. Congenital cataract is one of the leading causes of human blindness. In this study, we identified a novel, heterozygous c.385G<T mutation in CRYGC that resulted in the substitution of a highly conserved glycine by cysteine at codon 129 (p.Gly129Cys) in a three-generation Chinese family with autosomal dominant congenital nuclear cataract by sequencing candidate genes. Using zebrafish as a model, we demonstrated that γC-crystallin p.Gly129Cys mutant caused the vacuole and the incomplete denucleation of lens, recapitulating the cataract phenotype in human beings. Molecular modeling and spectroscopic studies indicated that the mutation impaired the tertiary structure of the protein by modifying the H-bonding network in the C-terminal domain. The mutation led to a dramatic decrease in the thermal stability of γC-crystallin, and a significant increase in the propensity of aggregation when subject to storage at high concentrations, heat, and UV- irradiation stresses. Taken together, these results indicate that a novel γC-crystallin p.Gly129Cys mutation impaired the tertiary structure of the protein and caused cataract formation, which provides a new insight into how the mutation may affect the γC-crystallin structure, stability, and function. Our study also highlighted zebrafish as a valuable model tool for studying congenital inherited cataract.
22213154	Update of PAX2 mutations in renal coloboma syndrome and establishment of a locus-specific database. Renal coloboma syndrome, also known as papillorenal syndrome is an autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by ocular and renal malformations. Mutations in the paired-box gene, PAX2, have been identified in approximately half of individuals with classic findings of renal hypoplasia/dysplasia and abnormalities of the optic nerve. Prior to 2011, there was no actively maintained locus-specific database (LSDB) cataloguing the extent of genetic variation in the PAX2 gene and phenotypic variation in individuals with renal coloboma syndrome. Review of published cases and the collective diagnostic experience of three laboratories in the United States, France, and New Zealand identified 55 unique mutations in 173 individuals from 86 families. The three clinical laboratories participating in this collaboration contributed 28 novel variations in 68 individuals in 33 families, which represent a 50% increase in the number of variations, patients, and families published in the medical literature. An LSDB was created using the Leiden Open Variation Database platform: www.lovd.nl/PAX2. The most common findings reported in this series were abnormal renal structure or function (92% of individuals), ophthalmological abnormalities (77% of individuals), and hearing loss (7% of individuals). Additional clinical findings and genetic counseling implications are discussed.
22275001	Nonsynonymous variants in the SMAD6 gene predispose to congenital cardiovascular malformation. Congenital cardiovascular malformation (CVM) exhibits familial predisposition, but most of the specific genetic factors involved are unknown. Postulating that rare variants in genes in critical cardiac developmental pathways predispose to CVM, we systematically surveyed three genes of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway for novel variants. Exonic, splice site, and untranslated regions of BMPR1A, BMPR2, and SMAD6 genes were sequenced in 90 unrelated sporadic cases of CVM. One nonsynonymous variant (p.C484F) with predicted functional impact was found in the MAD homology 2 domain of SMAD6, an intracellular inhibitor of BMP signaling. Sequencing this domain in an additional 346 cases of CVM yielded two further nonsynonymous variants (p.P415L and p.A325T). Functional effects of all three SMAD6 mutations were investigated using BMP signaling assays in vitro. Two SMAD6 variants (p.C484F and p.P415L) had significantly (P < 0.05) lower activity than wild-type SMAD6 in inhibiting BMP signaling in a transcriptional reporter assay. In addition, the p.C484F variant had a significantly (P < 0.05) lower capacity to inhibit an osteogenic response to BMP signaling. We conclude that low-frequency deleterious variants in SMAD6 predispose to CVM. This is the first report of a human disease phenotype related to genetic variation in SMAD6.
22290723	Association of glycosylated hemoglobin with the gene encoding CDKAL1 in the Korean Association Resource (KARE) study. Genome-wide associations with glycosylated hemoglobin, which reflects the long-term glycemia, were examined using two independent cohorts of the Korea Association Resource (KARE) consortium. We first identified sequence variants within a linkage disequilibrium block (r(2) > 0.98) in the intron 5 of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory subunit-associated protein 1-like 1 (CDKAL1) gene using 4,275 normoglycemic subjects of Cohort 1 (P < 2.5 × 10(-8)). The association was replicated in 3,782 normoglycemic subjects of Cohort 2. Furthermore, the sequence variants were also associated with glucose levels after oral glucose tolerance test. Especially, a strong association with 1 h glucose (P = 1.3 × 10(-11)) led us to interpreting that CDKAL1 might influence the level of glycosylated hemoglobin by affecting 1 h glucose level. Ultimately, accumulated effects on the glycosylated hemoglobin level by the genetic variation of CDKAL1 might affect susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus.
22331697	Microarray-based copy number analysis of neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1)-associated malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors reveals a role for Rho-GTPase pathway genes in NF1 tumorigenesis. Neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1) is associated with the growth of benign and malignant tumors. Approximately 15% of NF1 patients develop malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs), underlining the need to identify specific diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers associated with MPNST development. The Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) Array 6.0 was used to perform SNP genotyping and copy number alteration (CNA), loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH), and copy number neutral-LOH (CNN-LOH) analyses of DNA isolated from 15 MPNSTs, five benign plexiform neurofibromas (PNFs), and patient-matched lymphocyte DNAs. MPNSTs exhibited high-level CNN-LOH, with recurrent changes occurring in MPNSTs but not PNFs. CNN-LOH was evident in MPNSTs but occurred less frequently than genomic deletions. CNAs involving the ITGB8, PDGFA, Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 (RAC1) (7p21-p22), PDGFRL (8p22-p21.3), and matrix metallopeptidase 12 (MMP12) (11q22.3) genes were specific to MPNSTs. Pathway analysis revealed the MPNST-specific amplification of seven Rho-GTPase pathway genes and several cytoskeletal remodeling/cell adhesion genes. In knockdown experiments employing short-hairpin RAC1, ROCK2, PTK2, and LIMK1 RNAs to transfect both control and MPNST-derived cell lines, cell adhesion was significantly increased in the MPNST cell lines, whereas wound healing, cell migration, and invasiveness were reduced, consistent with a role for these Rho-GTPase pathway genes in MPNST development and metastasis. These results suggest new targets for therapeutic intervention in relation to MPNSTs.
22434506	Large-scale objective phenotyping of 3D facial morphology. Abnormal phenotypes have played significant roles in the discovery of gene function, but organized collection of phenotype data has been overshadowed by developments in sequencing technology. In order to study phenotypes systematically, large-scale projects with standardized objective assessment across populations are considered necessary. The report of the 2006 Human Variome Project meeting (Cotton et al, 2007) recommended documentation of phenotypes through electronic means by collaborative groups of computational scientists and clinicians using standard, structured descriptions of disease-specific phenotypes. In this report, we describe progress over the past decade in three-dimensional (3D) digital imaging and shape analysis of the face, and future prospects for large-scale facial phenotyping. Illustrative examples are given throughout using a collection of 1,107 3D face images of healthy controls and individuals with a range of genetic conditions involving facial dysmorphism.
22473970	A diagnostic genetic test for the physical mapping of germline rearrangements in the susceptibility breast cancer genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. The BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are involved in breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility. About 2 to 4% of breast cancer patients with positive family history, negative for point mutations, can be expected to carry large rearrangements in one of these two genes. We developed a novel diagnostic genetic test for the physical mapping of large rearrangements, based on molecular combing (MC), a FISH-based technique for direct visualization of single DNA molecules at high resolution. We designed specific Genomic Morse Codes (GMCs), covering the exons, the noncoding regions, and large genomic portions flanking both genes. We validated our approach by testing 10 index cases with positive family history of breast cancer and 50 negative controls. Large rearrangements, corresponding to deletions and duplications with sizes ranging from 3 to 40 kb, were detected and characterized on both genes, including four novel mutations. The nature of all the identified mutations was confirmed by high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and breakpoints characterized by sequencing. The developed GMCs allowed to localize several tandem repeat duplications on both genes. We propose the developed genetic test as a valuable tool to screen large rearrangements in BRCA1 and BRCA2 to be combined in clinical settings with an assay capable of detecting small mutations.
22570304	Retinitis pigmentosa: More genes, more variants, more work.
22623374	Gaucher disease paradigm: From ERAD to comorbidity. Mutations in the GBA gene, encoding the lysosomal acid beta-glucocerebrosidase (GCase), lead to deficient activity of the enzyme in the lysosomes, to glucosylceramide accumulation and to development of Gaucher disease (GD). More than 280 mutations in the GBA gene have been directly associated with GD. Mutant GCase variants present variable levels of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention, due to their inability to correctly fold, and undergo ER-associated degradation (ERAD) in the proteasomes. The degree of ER retention and proteasomal degradation is one of the factors that determine GD severity. In the present review, we discuss ERAD of mutant GCase variants and its possible consequences in GD patients and in carriers of GD mutations. Hum Mutat 33:1398-1407, 2012. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
