10603326	Crystal structure of an inhibitor complex of the 3C proteinase from hepatitis A virus (HAV) and implications for the polyprotein processing in HAV.	The proteolytic processing of the viral polyprotein is an essential step during the life cycle of hepatitis A virus (HAV), as it is in all positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses of animals. In HAV the 3C proteinase is the only proteolytic activity involved in the polyprotein processing. The specific recognition of the cleavage sites by the 3C proteinase depends on the amino acid sequence of the cleavage site. The structure of the complex of the HAV 3C proteinase and a dipeptide inhibitor has been determined by X-ray crystallography. The double-mutant of HAV 3C (C24S, F82A) was inhibited with the specific inhibitor iodoacetyl-valyl-phenylalanyl-amide. The resulting complex had an acetyl-Val-Phe-amide group covalently attached to the S(gamma) atom of the nucleophilic Cys 172 of the enzyme. Crystals of the complex of HAV 3C (C24S, F82A) acetyl-Val-Phe-amide were found to be monoclinic, space group P2(1), having 4 molecules in the asymmetric unit and diffracting to 1.9-A resolution. The final refined structure consists of 4 molecules of HAV 3C (C24S,F82A) acetyl-Val-Phe-amide, 1 molecule of DMSO, 1 molecule of glycerol, and 514 water molecules. There are considerable conformational differences among the four molecules in the asymmetric unit. The final R-factor is 20.4% for all observed reflections between 15.0- and 1.9-A resolution and the corresponding R(free) is 29.8%. The dipeptide inhibitor is bound to the S(1)(') and S(2)(') specificity subsites of the proteinase. The crystal structure reveals that the HAV 3C proteinase possesses a well-defined S(2)(') specificity pocket and suggests that the P(2)(') residue could be an important determinant for the selection of the primary cleavage site during the polyprotein processing in HAV.
9696852	The poliovirus empty capsid specifically recognizes the poliovirus receptor and undergoes some, but not all, of the transitions associated with cell entry.	Experimental results presented here demonstrate that the poliovirus empty capsid binds with saturable character to poliovirus-susceptible cells, binds preferentially to susceptible cells, and competes with mature virus for binding sites on cells. Hence, induced changes in the structure and/or stability of the particle by RNA encapsidation and virus maturation are not necessary for recognition by receptor. In mature virus, heat-induced rearrangements mimic those induced by receptor at physiological temperatures in several important respects, namely, expulsion of VP4 and externalization of the VP1 N-terminal arm. It is shown here that in the empty capsid the VP1 N-terminal arm is externalized but the VP4 portion of VP0 is not. Thus, these two hallmark rearrangements associated with cell entry can be uncoupled.
7638617	Crystal structure of a conserved protease that binds DNA: the bleomycin hydrolase, Gal6.	Bleomycin hydrolase is a cysteine protease that hydrolyzes the anticancer drug bleomycin. The homolog in yeast, Gal6, has recently been identified and found to bind DNA and to act as a repressor in the Gal4 regulatory system. The crystal structure of Gal6 at 2.2 A resolution reveals a hexameric structure with a prominent central channel. The papain-like active sites are situated within the central channel, in a manner resembling the organization of active sites in the proteasome. The Gal6 channel is lined with 60 lysine residues from the six subunits, suggesting a role in DNA binding. The carboxyl-terminal arm of Gal6 extends into the active site cleft and may serve a regulatory function. Rather than each residing in distinct, separable domains, the protease and DNA-binding activities appear structurally intertwined in the hexamer, implying a coupling of these two activities.
3549712	The structural basis for the interaction between L-tryptophan and the Escherichia coli trp aporepressor.	We have employed equilibrium dialysis to help study the mechanism by which the unliganded Escherichia coli trp aporepressor is activated by L-tryptophan to the liganded trp repressor. By measuring the relative affinity of L-tryptophan and various tryptophan analogues for the co-repressor's binding site, we have estimated the extent to which each of the functional groups of L-tryptophan contributes to the liganding process and discuss their role in the context of the crystal structures of the trp repressor and aporepressor. We have found that the indole ring and alpha carboxyl group of L-tryptophan are mainly responsible for its affinity to the aporepressor. The alpha amino group, however, has a small negative contribution to the affinity of L-tryptophan for the aporepressor which may be associated with its essential role in operator-specific binding.
8515812	Crystallographic analysis of the catalytic mechanism of haloalkane dehalogenase.	Crystal structures of haloalkane dehalogenase were determined in the presence of the substrate 1,2-dichloroethane. At pH 5 and 4 degrees C, substrate is bound in the active site without being converted; warming to room temperature causes the substrate's carbon-chlorine bond to be broken, producing a chloride ion with concomitant alkylation of the active-site residue Asp124. At pH 6 and room temperature the alkylated enzyme is hydrolysed by a water molecule activated by the His289-Asp260 pair in the active site. These results show that catalysis by the dehalogenase proceeds by a two-step mechanism involving an ester intermediate covalently bound at Asp124.
10913274	Role of amino acid residues at turns in the conformational stability and folding of human lysozyme.	To clarify the role of amino acid residues at turns in the conformational stability and folding of a globular protein, six mutant human lysozymes deleted or substituted at turn structures were investigated by calorimetry, GuHCl denaturation experiments, and X-ray crystal analysis. The thermodynamic properties of the mutant and wild-type human lysozymes were compared and discussed on the basis of their three-dimensional structures. For the deletion mutants, Delta47-48 and Delta101, the deleted residues are in turns on the surface and are absent in human alpha-lactalbumin, which is homologous to human lysozyme in amino acid sequence and tertiary structure. The stability of both mutants would be expected to increase due to a decrease in conformational entropy in the denatured state; however, both proteins were destabilized. The destabilizations were mainly caused by the disappearance of intramolecular hydrogen bonds. Each part deleted was recovered by the turn region like the alpha-lactalbumin structure, but there were differences in the main-chain conformation of the turn between each deletion mutant and alpha-lactalbumin even if the loop length was the same. For the point mutants, R50G, Q58G, H78G, and G37Q, the main-chain conformations of these substitution residues located in turns adopt a left-handed helical region in the wild-type structure. It is thought that the left-handed non-Gly residue has unfavorable conformational energy compared to the left-handed Gly residue. Q58G was stabilized, but the others had little effect on the stability. The structural analysis revealed that the turns could rearrange the main-chain conformation to accommodate the left-handed non-Gly residues. The present results indicate that turn structures are able to change their main-chain conformations, depending upon the side-chain features of amino acid residues on the turns. Furthermore, stopped-flow GuHCl denaturation experiments on the six mutants were performed. The effects of mutations on unfolding-refolding kinetics were significantly different among the mutant proteins. The deletion/substitutions in turns located in the alpha-domain of human lysozyme affected the refolding rate, indicating the contribution of turn structures to the folding of a globular protein.
7703848	Kinetics and crystal structure of a mutant Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase (Asp-369-->Asn): a mechanism involving one zinc per active site.	Using site-directed mutagenesis, an aspartate side chain involved in binding metal ions in the active site of Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase (Asp-369) was replaced, alternately, by asparagine (D369N) and by alanine (D369A). The purified mutant enzymes showed reduced turnover rates (kcat) and increased Michaelis constants (Km). The kcat for the D369A enzyme was 5,000-fold lower than the value for the wild-type enzyme. The D369N enzyme required Zn2+ in millimolar concentrations to become fully active; even under these conditions the kcat measured for hydrolysis of p-nitrophenol phosphate was 2 orders of magnitude lower than for the wild-type enzyme. Thus the kcat/Km ratios showed that catalysis is 50 times less efficient when the carboxylate side chain of Asp-369 is replaced by the corresponding amide; and activity is reduced to near nonenzymic levels when the carboxylate is replaced by a methyl group. The crystal structure of D369N, solved to 2.5 A resolution with an R-factor of 0.189, showed vacancies at 2 of the 3 metal binding sites. On the basis of the kinetic results and the refined X-ray coordinates, a reaction mechanism is proposed for phosphate ester hydrolysis by the D369N enzyme involving only 1 metal with the possible assistance of a histidine side chain.
7589423	Crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of outer membrane phospholipase A from Escherichia coli.	The outer membrane phospholipase A (OMPLA) of Escherichia coli is one of the few integral outer membrane proteins displaying enzymatic activity. It is encoded as a mature protein of 269 amino acids preceded by a signal sequence of 20 amino acids. There is no sequence homology with water-soluble lipases and phospholipases. Crystals of the mature enzyme were obtained at 22 degrees C from 24-28% (v/v) 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol in Bis-Tris buffer, pH 5.9-6.0, with 1 mM calcium chloride and 1.5% (w/v) beta-octylglucoside. They have the symmetry of the trigonal spacegroup P3(1)21 (or P3(2)21) with cell dimensions of a = b = 79.6 A and c = 102.8 A (alpha = beta = 90 degrees, gamma = 120 degrees). Native crystals diffract to a resolution of 2.6 A.
8612277	The 1.85 A structure of vaccinia protein VP39: a bifunctional enzyme that participates in the modification of both mRNA ends.	VP39 is a bifunctional vaccinia virus protein that acts as both an mRNA cap-specific RNA 2'-O-methyltransferase and a poly(A) polymerase processivity factor. Here, we report the 1.85 A crystal structure of a VP39 variant complexed with its AdoMet cofactor. VP39 comprises a single core domain with structural similarity to the catalytic domains of other methyltransferases. Surface features and mutagenesis data suggest two possible RNA-binding sites with novel underlying architecture, one of which forms a cleft spanning the region adjacent to the methyltransferase active site. This report provides a prototypic structure for an RNA methyltransferase, a protein that interacts with the mRNA 5' cap, and an intact poxvirus protein.
11206074	Rationale for Bcl-xL/Bad peptide complex formation from structure, mutagenesis, and biophysical studies.	The three-dimensional structure of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL complexed to a 25-residue peptide from the death promoting region of Bad was determined using NMR spectroscopy. Although the overall structure is similar to Bcl-xL bound to a 16-residue peptide from the Bak protein (Sattler et al., 1997), the Bad peptide forms additional interactions with Bcl-xL. However, based upon site-directed mutagenesis experiments, these additional contacts do not account for the increased affinity of the Bad 25-mer for Bcl-xL compared to the Bad 16-mer. Rather, the increased helix propensity of the Bad 25-mer is primarily responsible for its greater affinity for Bcl-xL. Based on this observation, a pair of 16-residue peptides were designed and synthesized that were predicted to have a high helix propensity while maintaining the interactions important for complexation with Bcl-xL. Both peptides showed an increase in helix propensity compared to the wild-type and exhibited an enhanced affinity for Bcl-xL.
16443929	Solution Structure of a Post-transition State Analog of the Phosphotransfer Reaction between the A and B Cytoplasmic Domains of the Mannitol Transporter IIMannitol of the Escherichia coli Phosphotransferase System.	The solution structure of the post-transition state complex between the isolated cytoplasmic A (IIA(Mtl)) and phosphorylated B (phospho-IIB(Mtl)) domains of the mannitol transporter of the Escherichia coli phosphotransferase system has been solved by NMR. The active site His-554 of IIA(Mtl) was mutated to glutamine to block phosphoryl transfer activity, and the active site Cys-384 of IIB(Mtl) (residues of IIB(Mtl) are denoted in italic type) was substituted by serine to permit the formation of a stable phosphorylated form of IIB(Mtl). The two complementary interaction surfaces are predominantly hydrophobic, and two methionines on IIB(Mtl), Met-388 and Met-393, serve as anchors by interacting with two deep pockets on the surface of IIA(Mtl). With the exception of a salt bridge between the conserved Arg-538 of IIA(Mtl) and the phosphoryl group of phospho-IIB(Mtl), electrostatic interactions between the two proteins are limited to the outer edges of the interface, are few in number, and appear to be weak. This accounts for the low affinity of the complex (K(d) approximately 3.7 mm), which is optimally tuned to the intact biological system in which the A and B domains are expressed as a single polypeptide connected by a flexible 21-residue linker. The phosphoryl transition state can readily be modeled with no change in protein-protein orientation and minimal perturbations in both the backbone immediately adjacent to His-554 and Cys-384 and the side chains in close proximity to the phosphoryl group. Comparison with the previously solved structure of the IIA(Mtl)-HPr complex reveals how IIA(Mtl) uses the same interaction surface to recognize two structurally unrelated proteins and explains the much higher affinity of IIA(Mtl) for HPr than IIB(Mtl).
12003953	CcaR is an autoregulatory protein that binds to the ccaR and cefD-cmcI promoters of the cephamycin C-clavulanic acid cluster in Streptomyces clavuligerus.	The putative regulatory CcaR protein, which is encoded in the beta-lactam supercluster of Streptomyces clavuligerus, has been partially purified by ammonium sulfate precipitation and heparin affinity chromatography. In addition, it was expressed in Escherichia coli, purified as a His-tagged recombinant protein (rCcaR), and used to raise anti-rCcaR antibodies. The partially purified CcaR protein from S. clavuligerus was able to bind DNA fragments containing the promoter regions of the ccaR gene itself and the bidirectional cefD-cmcI promoter region. In contrast, CcaR did not bind to DNA fragments with the promoter regions of other genes of the cephamycin-clavulanic acid supercluster including lat, blp, claR, car-cyp, and the unlinked argR gene. The DNA shifts obtained with CcaR were prevented by anti-rCcaR immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies but not by anti-rabbit IgG antibodies. ccaR and the bidirectional cefD-cmcI promoter region were fused to the xylE reporter gene and expressed in Streptomyces lividans and S. clavuligerus. These constructs produced low catechol dioxygenase activity in the absence of CcaR; activity was increased 1.7- to 4.6-fold in cultures expressing CcaR. Amplification of the ccaR promoter region lacking its coding sequence in a high-copy-number plasmid in S. clavuligerus ATCC 27064 resulted in a reduced production of cephamycin C and clavulanic acid, by 12 to 20% and 40 to 60%, respectively, due to titration of the CcaR regulator. These findings confirm that CcaR is a positively acting autoregulatory protein able to bind to its own promoter as well as to the cefD-cmcI bidirectional promoter region.
8952503	Hydrogen bonding and solvent structure in an antigen-antibody interface. Crystal structures and thermodynamic characterization of three Fv mutants complexed with lysozyme.	Using site-directed mutagenesis, X-ray crystallography, and titration calorimetry, we have examined the structural and thermodynamic consequences of removing specific hydrogen bonds in an antigen-antibody interface. Crystal structures of three antibody FvD1.3 mutants, VLTyr50Ser (VLY50S), VHTyr32Ala (VHY32A), and VHTyr101Phe (VHY101F), bound to hen egg white lysozyme (HEL) have been determined at resolutions ranging from 1.85 to 2.10 A. In the wild-type (WT) FvD1.3-HEL complex, the hydroxyl groups of VLTyr50, VHTyr32, and VHTyr101 each form at least one hydrogen bond with the lysozyme antigen. Thermodynamic parameters for antibody-antigen association have been measured using isothermal titration calorimetry, giving equilibrium binding constants Kb (M-1) of 2.6 x 10(7) (VLY50S), 7.0 x 10(7) (VHY32A), and 4.0 x 10(6) (VHY101F). For the WT complex, Kb is 2.7 x 10(8) M-1; thus, the affinities of the mutant Fv fragments for HEL are 10-, 4-, and 70-fold lower than that of the original antibody, respectively. In all three cases entropy compensation results in an affinity loss that would otherwise be larger. Comparison of the three mutant crystal structures with the WT structure demonstrates that the removal of direct antigen-antibody hydrogen bonds results in minimal shifts in the positions of the remaining protein atoms. These observations show that this complex is considerably tolerant, both structurally and thermodynamically, to the truncation of antibody side chains that form hydrogen bonds with the antigen. Alterations in interface solvent structure for two of the mutant complexes (VLY50S and VHY32A) appear to compensate for the unfavorable enthalpy changes when protein-protein interactions are removed. These changes in solvent structure, along with the increased mobility of side chains near the mutation site, probably contribute to the observed entropy compensation. For the VHY101F complex, the nature of the large entropy compensation is not evident from a structural comparison of the WT and mutant complexes. Differences in the local structure and dynamics of the uncomplexed Fv molecules may account for the entropic discrepancy in this case.
12649487	Gating the selectivity filter in ClC chloride channels.	ClC channels conduct chloride (Cl-) ions across cell membranes and thereby govern the electrical activity of muscle cells and certain neurons, the transport of fluid and electrolytes across epithelia, and the acidification of intracellular vesicles. The structural basis of ClC channel gating was studied. Crystal structures of wild-type and mutant Escherichia coli ClC channels bound to a monoclonal Fab fragment reveal three Cl- binding sites within the 15-angstrom neck of an hourglass-shaped pore. The Cl- binding site nearest the extracellular solution can be occupied either by a Cl- ion or by a glutamate carboxyl group. Mutations of this glutamate residue in Torpedo ray ClC channels alter gating in electrophysiological assays. These findings reveal a form of gating in which the glutamate carboxyl group closes the pore by mimicking a Cl- ion.
11256612	Catalysis of serine oligopeptidases is controlled by a gating filter mechanism.	Proteases have a variety of strategies for selecting substrates in order to prevent uncontrolled protein degradation. A recent crystal structure determination of prolyl oligopeptidase has suggested a way for substrate selection involving an unclosed seven-bladed beta-propeller domain. We have engineered a disulfide bond between the first and seventh blades of the propeller, which resulted in the loss of enzymatic activity. These results provided direct evidence for a novel strategy of regulation in which oscillating propeller blades act as a gating filter during catalysis, letting small peptide substrates into the active site while excluding large proteins to prevent accidental proteolysis.
2143786	Maltodextrin-dependent crystallization of cyclomaltodextrin glucanotransferase from Bacillus circulans.	Crystals of cyclomaltodextrin glucanotransferase from Bacillus circulans (EC 2.4.1.19) suitable for high-resolution X-ray analysis were obtained by vapor diffusion against 60% (v/v) 2-methyl 2,4-pentanediol buffered with 100 mM-sodium Hepes, pH 7.55. The crystals have P2(1)2(1)2(1) space group symmetry, with a = 120.4 A, b = 110.9 A and c = 66.4 A, and contain one molecule of 68,000 in the asymmetric unit. Growth of single enzyme crystals was found to require the presence of either alpha-cyclodextrin, beta-cyclodextrin, gamma-cyclodextrin, or maltose in high molar excess, a requirement that could not be fulfilled by glucose, the basic building block of these compounds. Although the exact role of cyclic and linear maltodextrins in enzyme crystallization is not yet known, we have preliminary evidence that these compounds are degraded by the enzyme in the crystallization droplet.
9692955	Cryocrystallography and microspectrophotometry of a mutant (alpha D60N) tryptophan synthase alpha 2 beta 2 complex reveals allosteric roles of alpha Asp60.	We have investigated the role of Asp60 of the alpha-subunit in allosteric communication between the tryptophan synthase alpha- and beta-subunits. Crystallographic and microspectrophotometric studies have been carried out on a mutant (alpha D60N) tryptophan synthase alpha 2 beta 2 complex which has no observable alpha-activity, but has substantial beta-activity. Single-crystal polarized absorption spectra indicate that the external aldimine is the predominant L-serine intermediate and that the amount of the intermediate formed is independent of pH, monovalent cations, and allosteric effectors. The three-dimensional structure is reported for this mutant enzyme complexed with indole 3-propanol phosphate bound to the alpha-site and L-serine bound to the beta-site (alpha D60N-IPP-Ser), and this structure is compared with that of the unliganded mutant enzyme (alpha D60N). In the complex, L-serine forms a stable external aldimine with the pyridoxal phosphate coenzyme at the active site of the beta-subunit. The conformation of the unliganded mutant is almost identical to that of the wild type enzyme. However, the structure of the mutant complexed with IPP and serine exhibits ligand-induced conformational changes much smaller than those observed previously for another mutant enzyme in the presence of the same ligands (beta K87T-IPP-Ser) [Rhee, S., Parris, K. D., Hyde, C. C., Ahmed, S. A., Miles, E. W., and Davies, D. R. (1997) Biochemistry 36, 7664-7680]. The alpha D60N-IPP-Ser alpha 2 beta 2 complex does not undergo the following ligand-induced conformational changes: (1) the closure of the alpha-subunit loop 6 (residues 178-191), (2) the movement of the mobile subdomain (residues 93-189) of the beta-subunit, and (3) the rotation of the alpha-subunit relative to the beta-subunit. These observations show that alpha Asp60 plays important roles in the closure of loop 6 and in allosteric communication between the alpha- and beta-subunits.
7664122	Alternating arginine-modulated substrate specificity in an engineered tyrosine aminotransferase.	Mutation of six residues of Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase results in substantial acquisition of the transamination properties of tyrosine amino-transferase without loss of aspartate transaminase activity. X-ray crystallographic analysis of key inhibitor complexes of the hexamutant reveals the structural basis for this substrate selectivity. It appears that tyrosine aminotransferase achieves nearly equal affinities for a wide range of amino acids by an unusual conformational switch. An active-site arginine residue either shifts its position to electrostatically interact with charged substrates or moves aside to allow access of aromatic ligands.
8302837	Bound water molecules and conformational stabilization help mediate an antigen-antibody association.	We report the three-dimensional structures, at 1.8-A resolution, of the Fv fragment of the anti-hen egg white lysozyme antibody D1.3 in its free and antigen-bound forms. These structures reveal a role for solvent molecules in stabilizing the complex and provide a molecular basis for understanding the thermodynamic forces which drive the association reaction. Four water molecules are buried and others form a hydrogen-bonded network around the interface, bridging antigen and antibody. Comparison of the structures of free and bound Fv fragment of D1.3 reveals that several of the ordered water molecules in the free antibody combining site are retained and that additional water molecules link antigen and antibody upon complex formation. This solvation of the complex should weaken the hydrophobic effect, and the resulting large number of solvent-mediated hydrogen bonds, in conjunction with direct protein-protein interactions, should generate a significant enthalpic component. Furthermore, a stabilization of the relative mobilities of the antibody heavy- and light-chain variable domains and of that of the third complementarity-determining loop of the heavy chain seen in the complex should generate a negative entropic contribution opposing the enthalpic and the hydrophobic (solvent entropy) effects. This structural analysis is consistent with measurements of enthalpy and entropy changes by titration calorimetry, which show that enthalpy drives the antigen-antibody reaction. Thus, the main forces stabilizing the complex arise from antigen-antibody hydrogen bonding, van der Waals interactions, enthalpy of hydration, and conformational stabilization rather than solvent entropy (hydrophobic) effects.
9108091	Unique features in the structure of the complex between HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and the bis(heteroaryl)piperazine (BHAP) U-90152 explain resistance mutations for this nonnucleoside inhibitor.	The viral reverse transcriptase (RT) provides an attractive target in the search for anti-HIV therapies. The nonnucleoside inhibitors (NNIs) are a diverse set of compounds (usually HIV-1 specific) that function by distorting the polymerase active site upon binding in a nearby pocket. Despite being potent and of generally low toxicity, their clinical use has been limited by rapid selection for resistant viral populations. The 2.65-A resolution structure of the complex between HIV-1 RT and the bis(heteroaryl)piperazine (BHAP) NNI, 1-(5-methanesulfonamido-1H-indol-2-yl-carbonyl)-4- [3-(1-methyl-ethylamino) pyridinyl] piperazine (U-90152), reveals the inhibitor conformation and bound water molecules. The bulky U-90152 molecule occupies the same pocket as other NNIs, but the complex is stabilized quite differently, in particular by hydrogen bonding to the main chain of Lys-103 and extensive hydrophobic contacts with Pro-236. These interactions rationalize observed resistance mutations, notably Pro-236-Leu, which occurs characteristically for BHAPs. When bound, part of U-90152 protrudes into the solvent creating a channel between Pro-236 and the polypeptide segments 225-226 and 105-106, giving the first clear evidence of the entry mode for NNIs. The structure allows prediction of binding modes for related inhibitors [(altrylamino)piperidine-BHAPs] and suggests changes to U-90152, such as the addition of a 6 amino group to the pyridine ring, which may make binding more resilient to mutations in the RT. The observation of novel hydrogen bonding to the protein main chain may provide lessons for the improvement of quite different inhibitors.
11371167	Structure of a C-rich strand fragment of the human centromeric satellite III: a pH-dependent intercalation topology.	Repetitive DNA sequences may adopt unusual pairing arrangements. At acid to neutral pH, cytidine-rich DNA oligodeoxynucleotides can form the i-motif structure in which two parallel-stranded duplexes with C.C(+) pairs are intercalated head-to-tail. The i-motif may be formed by multimeric associations or by intra-molecular folding, depending on the number of cytidine tracts, the nucleotide sequences between them, and the experimental conditions.We have found that a natural fragment of the human centromeric satellite III, d(CCATTCCATTCCTTTCC), can form two monomeric i-motif structures that differ in their intercalation topology and that are favored at pH values higher (the eta-form) and lower (the lambda-form) than 4.6. The change in intercalation may be related to adenine protonation in the loops.We studied the uridine derivative methylated on the first cytidine base, d(5mCCATTCCAUTCCUTTCC), whose proton spectrum is better resolved. The intercalation topologies are (C7.C17)/(5mC1.C11)/(C6.C16)/(C2.C12) for form lambda and (5mC1.C11)/(C7.C17)/(C2.C12)/(C6.C16) for form eta. We have solved the structure of the eta-form, and we present a model for the lambda-form. The switch from eta to lambda involves disruption of the i-motif. In both forms, the central AUT linker crosses the wide groove, and the first and the third linkers loop across the minor grooves. The i-motif core is extended in the eta-form by the inter-loop reverse Watson-Crick A3.U13 pair, whose dissociation constant is around 10(-2) at 0 degrees C, and in the lambda-form by the interloop T5.T15 pair.In contrast, d(5mCCATTCCTTACCTTTCC) folds into a pH-independent structure that has the same intercalation topology as the lambda-form. The i-motif core is extended below by the interloop T5.T15 pair and closed on top by the T8.A10 pair.Thus, the C-rich strand of the human satellite III tandem repeats, like the G-rich strand, can fold into various compact structures. The relevance of these features to centromeric function remains unknown.
8989317	The RNA binding domain of ribosomal protein L11 is structurally similar to homeodomains.	The RNA binding domain of ribosomal protein L11 is strikingly similar to the homeodomain class of eukaryotic DNA binding proteins: it contains three alpha-helices that superimpose with homeodomain alpha-helices, and some conserved residues required for rRNA recognition align with homeodomain helix III residues contacting DNA bases.
12221102	Acyl-intermediate structures of the extended-spectrum class A beta-lactamase, Toho-1, in complex with cefotaxime, cephalothin, and benzylpenicillin.	Bacterial resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics is a serious problem limiting current clinical therapy. The most common form of resistance is the production of beta-lactamases that inactivate beta-lactam antibiotics. Toho-1 is an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase that has acquired efficient activity not only to penicillins but also to cephalosporins including the expanded-spectrum cephalosporins that were developed to be stable in former beta-lactamases. We present the acyl-intermediate structures of Toho-1 in complex with cefotaxime (expanded-spectrum cephalosporin), cephalothin (non-expanded-spectrum cephalosporin), and benzylpenicillin at 1.8-, 2.0-, and 2.1-A resolutions, respectively. These structures reveal distinct features that can explain the ability of Toho-1 to hydrolyze expanded-spectrum cephalosporins. First, the Omega-loop of Toho-1 is displaced to avoid the steric contacts with the bulky side chain of cefotaxime. Second, the conserved residues Asn(104) and Asp(240) form unique interactions with the bulky side chain of cefotaxime to fix it tightly. Finally, the unique interaction between the conserved Ser(237) and cephalosporins probably helps to bring the beta-lactam carbonyl group to the suitable position in the oxyanion hole, thus increasing the cephalosporinase activity.
14559893	Molecular basis for synergistic transcriptional activation by Oct1 and Sox2 revealed from the solution structure of the 42-kDa Oct1.Sox2.Hoxb1-DNA ternary transcription factor complex.	The Oct and Sox transcription factors control many different aspects of neural development and embryogenesis, often binding to adjacent sites on DNA, and interacting with one another through their DNA binding domains to regulate transcription synergistically. Oct proteins contain two DNA binding domains (POUS and POUHD) connected by a flexible linker, which interact with DNA in a bipartite manner. Residual dipolar coupling measurements on the binary Oct1.DNA complex reveal that the two domains are characterized by distinct alignment tensors in both phage pf1 and polyethylene glycol/hexanol liquid crystalline media. We show that this difference is due to a fast microscopic dissociation/association process involving alternative binding modes for the weaker binding POUS domain in the binary complex. Upon binding of Sox2 to an adjacent site in the Hoxb1 regulatory element, all components of the ternary Oct1.Sox2.DNA complex share a single alignment tensor. Thus ternary complex formation increases the site-specific affinity of Oct1 for DNA by effectively locking the POUS domain in a single orientation on the DNA. The solution NMR structure of the ternary 42 kDa Oct1.Sox2.Hoxb1-DNA complex, determined by novel procedures based on orientational restraints from dipolar couplings and conjoined rigid body/torsion angle dynamics, reveals that Sox2 and POUS interact through a predominantly hydrophobic interface, surrounded by a ring of electrostatic interactions. These observations suggest a mechanism of combinatorial control involving direct protein-protein interactions on the DNA whereby Oct1 in conjunction with a co-interacting transcription factor provide cell-specific transcription regulation.
11214325	The bacterial conjugation protein TrwB resembles ring helicases and F1-ATPase.	The transfer of DNA across membranes and between cells is a central biological process; however, its molecular mechanism remains unknown. In prokaryotes, trans-membrane passage by bacterial conjugation, is the main route for horizontal gene transfer. It is the means for rapid acquisition of new genetic information, including antibiotic resistance by pathogens. Trans-kingdom gene transfer from bacteria to plants or fungi and even bacterial sporulation are special cases of conjugation. An integral membrane DNA-binding protein, called TrwB in the Escherichia coli R388 conjugative system, is essential for the conjugation process. This large multimeric protein is responsible for recruiting the relaxosome DNA-protein complex, and participates in the transfer of a single DNA strand during cell mating. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of a soluble variant of TrwB. The molecule consists of two domains: a nucleotide-binding domain of alpha/beta topology, reminiscent of RecA and DNA ring helicases, and an all-alpha domain. Six equivalent protein monomers associate to form an almost spherical quaternary structure that is strikingly similar to F1-ATPase. A central channel, 20 A in width, traverses the hexamer.
8594346	Crystallization of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase with and without nucleic acid substrates, inhibitors, and an antibody Fab fragment.	null
15697221	Understanding GFP chromophore biosynthesis: controlling backbone cyclization and modifying post-translational chemistry.	The Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein (GFP) undergoes a remarkable post-translational modification to create a chromophore out of its component amino acids S65, Y66, and G67. Here, we describe mutational experiments in GFP designed to convert this chromophore into a 4-methylidene-imidazole-5-one (MIO) moiety similar to the post-translational active-site electrophile of histidine ammonia lyase (HAL). Crystallographic structures of GFP variant S65A Y66S (GFPhal) and of four additional related site-directed mutants reveal an aromatic MIO moiety and mechanistic details of GFP chromophore formation and MIO biosynthesis. Specifically, the GFP scaffold promotes backbone cyclization by (1) favoring nucleophilic attack by close proximity alignment of the G67 amide lone pair with the pi orbital of the residue 65 carbonyl and (2) removing enthalpic barriers by eliminating inhibitory main-chain hydrogen bonds in the precursor state. GFP R96 appears to induce structural rearrangements important in aligning the molecular orbitals for ring cyclization, favor G67 nitrogen deprotonation through electrostatic interactions with the Y66 carbonyl, and stabilize the reduced enolate intermediate. Our structures and analysis also highlight negative design features of the wild-type GFP architecture, which favor chromophore formation by destabilizing alternative conformations of the chromophore tripeptide. By providing a molecular basis for understanding and controlling the driving force and protein chemistry of chromophore creation, this research has implications for expansion of the genetic code through engineering of modified amino acids.
1313294	Expression and characterization of recombinant hepatitis A virus 3C proteinase.	The 3C proteinase from the hepatitis A virus (HAV) was cloned into a multicopy expression vector in Escherichia coli under control of the tac promoter. The resulting plasmid construction produced 3C proteinase as a soluble and active enzyme constituting approximately 10% of total cellular proteins. The enzyme was purified to apparent homogeneity as judged by SDS gel electrophoresis and HPLC reversed-phase and FPLC ion-exchange chromatography. A colorimetric assay was developed, and synthetic peptides derived from the predicted cleavage sites of the HAV polyprotein were tested for proteolysis of the enzyme. The peptide representing the 2B/2C cleavage site was cleaved most efficiently with a Km and kcat of 2.1 +/- 0.5 mM and 1.8 +/- 0.1 s-1, respectively. Site-directed mutagenesis was then used to identify the cysteine at position 172 as the active site nucleophile. Finally, the purified enzyme showed the expected endoproteinase activity on the P1 precursor protein generated by in vitro transcription/translation.
9159481	Comparison of the three-dimensional structures of recombinant human H and horse L ferritins at high resolution.	Mammalian ferritins are 24-mers assembled from two types of polypeptide chain which provide the molecule with different functions. H(eavy) chains catalyse the first step in iron storage, the oxidation of iron(II). L(ight) chains promote the nucleation of the mineral ferrihydrite enabling storage of iron(III) inside the protein shell. We report here the comparison of the three-dimensional structures of recombinant human H chain (HuHF) and horse L chain (HoLF) ferritin homopolymers, which have been refined at 1.9 A resolution. There is 53% sequence identity between these molecules, and the two structures are very similar, the H and L subunit alpha-carbons superposing to within 0.5 A rms deviation with 41 water molecules in common. Nevertheless, there are significant important differences which can be related to differences in function. In particular, the centres of the four-helix bundles contain distinctive groups of hydrophilic residues which have been associated with ferroxidase activity in H chains and enhanced stability in L chains. L chains contain a group of glutamates associated with mineralisation within the iron storage cavity of the protein.
16411772	Kinetic and crystallographic analysis of mutant Escherichia coli aminopeptidase P: insights into substrate recognition and the mechanism of catalysis.	Aminopeptidase P (APPro) is a manganese-dependent enzyme that cleaves the N-terminal amino acid from polypeptides where the second residue is proline. APPro shares a similar fold, substrate specificity, and catalytic mechanism with methionine aminopeptidase and prolidase. To investigate the roles of conserved residues at the active site, seven mutant forms of APPro were characterized kinetically and structurally. Mutation of individual metal ligands selectively abolished binding of either or both Mn(II) atoms at the active site, and none of these metal-ligand mutants had detectable catalytic activity. Mutation of the conserved active site residues His243 and His361 revealed that both are required for catalysis. We propose that His243 stabilizes substrate binding through an interaction with the carbonyl oxygen of the requisite proline residue of a substrate and that His361 stabilizes substrate binding and the gem-diol catalytic intermediate. Sequence, structural, and kinetic analyses reveal that His350, conserved in APPro and prolidase but not in methionine aminopeptidase, forms part of a hydrophobic binding pocket that gives APPro its proline specificity. Further, peptides in which the required proline residue is replaced by N-methylalanine or alanine are cleaved by APPro, but they are extremely poor substrates due to a loss of interactions between the prolidyl ring of the substrate and the hydrophobic proline-binding pocket.
15794647	Ligand migration and protein fluctuations in myoglobin mutant L29W.	We have determined eight X-ray structures of myoglobin mutant L29W at various experimental conditions. In addition, infrared spectroscopic experiments are presented, which are discussed in the light of the X-ray structures. Two distinct conformations of the CO-ligated protein were identified, giving rise to two stretching bands of heme-bound CO. If L29W MbCO crystals are illuminated around 180 K, a deoxy species is formed. The CO molecules migrate to the proximal side of the heme and remain trapped in the so-called Xe1 cavity upon temperature decrease to 105 K. The structure of this photoproduct is almost identical to the equilibrium high-temperature deoxy Mb structure. If the temperature is cycled to increasingly higher values, CO recombination is observed. Three intermediate structures have been determined during the rebinding process. Efficient recombination occurs only above 180 K, the characteristic temperature for the onset of protein dynamics. Rebinding is remarkably slow because bulky residues His64 and Trp29 block important migration pathways of the CO molecule.
7867072	Crystal structure of the replication terminator protein from B. subtilis at 2.6 A.	The crystal structure of the replication terminator protein (RTP) of B. subtilis has been determined at 2.6 A resolution. As previously suggested by both biochemical and biophysical studies, the molecule exists as a symmetric dimer and is in the alpha + beta protein-folding class. The protein has several uncommon features, including an antiparallel coiled-coil, which serves as the dimerization domain, and both an alpha-helix and a beta-ribbon suitably positioned to interact with the major and minor grooves of B-DNA. A site has been identified on the surface of RTP that is biochemically and positionally suitable for interaction with the replication-specific helicase. Other features of the structure are consistent with the polar contrahelicase mechanism of the protein. A model of the interaction between RTP and its cognate DNA is presented.
9541387	Crystal structures of the psychrophilic alpha-amylase from Alteromonas haloplanctis in its native form and complexed with an inhibitor.	Alteromonas haloplanctis is a bacterium that flourishes in Antarctic sea-water and it is considered as an extreme psychrophile. We have determined the crystal structures of the alpha-amylase (AHA) secreted by this bacterium, in its native state to 2.0 angstroms resolution as well as in complex with Tris to 1.85 angstroms resolution. The structure of AHA, which is the first experimentally determined three-dimensional structure of a psychrophilic enzyme, resembles those of other known alpha-amylases of various origins with a surprisingly greatest similarity to mammalian alpha-amylases. AHA contains a chloride ion which activates the hydrolytic cleavage of substrate alpha-1,4-glycosidic bonds. The chloride binding site is situated approximately 5 angstroms from the active site which is characterized by a triad of acid residues (Asp 174, Glu 200, Asp 264). These are all involved in firm binding of the Tris moiety. A reaction mechanism for substrate hydrolysis is proposed on the basis of the Tris inhibitor binding and the chloride activation. A trio of residues (Ser 303, His 337, Glu 19) having a striking spatial resemblance with serine-protease like catalytic triads was found approximately 22 angstroms from the active site. We found that this triad is equally present in other chloride dependent alpha-amylases, and suggest that it could be responsible for autoproteolytic events observed in solution for this cold adapted alpha-amylase.
15449941	Engineering of the pH optimum of Bacillus cereus beta-amylase: conversion of the pH optimum from a bacterial type to a higher-plant type.	The optimum pH of Bacillus cereus beta-amylase (BCB, pH 6.7) differs from that of soybean beta-amylase (SBA, pH 5.4) due to the substitution of a few amino acid residues near the catalytic base residue (Glu 380 in SBA and Glu 367 in BCB). To explore the mechanism for controlling the optimum pH of beta-amylase, five mutants of BCB (Y164E, Y164F, Y164H, Y164Q, and Y164Q/T47M/Y164E/T328N) were constructed and characterized with respect to enzymatic properties and X-ray structural crystal analysis. The optimum pH of the four single mutants shifted to 4.2-4.8, approximately 2 pH units and approximately 1 pH unit lower than those of BCB and SBA, respectively, and their k(cat) values decreased to 41-3% of that of the wild-type enzyme. The X-ray crystal analysis of the enzyme-maltose complexes showed that Glu 367 of the wild type is surrounded by two water molecules (W1 and W2) that are not found in SBA. W1 is hydrogen-bonded to both side chains of Glu 367 and Tyr 164. The mutation of Tyr 164 to Glu and Phe resulted in the disruption of the hydrogen bond between Tyr 164 Oeta and W1 and the introduction of two additional water molecules near position 164. In contrast, the triple mutant of BCB with a slightly decreased pH optimum at pH 6.0 has no water molecules (W1 and W2) around Glu 367. These results suggested that a water-mediated hydrogen bond network (Glu 367...W1...Tyr 164...Thr 328) is the primary requisite for the increased pH optimum of wild-type BCB. This strategy is completely different from that of SBA, in which a hydrogen bond network (Glu 380...Thr 340...Glu 178) reduces the optimum pH in a hydrophobic environment.
2067578	Convergent evolution of similar function in two structurally divergent enzymes.	An example of two related enzymes that catalyse similar reactions but possess different active sites is provided by comparing the structure of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase with glutathione reductase. Both are dimeric enzymes that catalyse the reduction of disulphides by pyridine nucleotides through an enzyme disulphide and a flavin. Human glutathione reductase contains four structural domains within each molecule: the flavin-adenine dinucleotide (FAD)- and nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-binding domains, the 'central' domain and the C-terminal domain that provides the dimer interface and part of the active site. Although both enzymes share the same catalytic mechanism and similar tertiary structures, their active sites do not resemble each other. We have determined the crystal structure of E. coli thioredoxin reductase at 2 A resolution, and show that thioredoxin reductase lacks the domain that provides the dimer interface in glutathione reductase, and forms a completely different dimeric structure. The catalytically active disulphides are located in different domains on opposite sides of the flavin ring system. This suggests that these enzymes diverged from an ancestral nucleotide-binding protein and acquired their disulphide reductase activities independently.
8805557	Crystal structures of reduced, oxidized, and mutated human thioredoxins: evidence for a regulatory homodimer.	BACKGROUND: Human thioredoxin reduces the disulfide bonds of numerous proteins in vitro, and can activate transcription factors such as NFkB in vivo. Thioredoxin can also act as a growth factor, and is overexpressed and secreted in certain tumor cells. RESULTS: Crystal structures were determined for reduced and oxidized wild type human thioredoxin (at 1.7 and 2.1 A nominal resolution, respectively), and for reduced mutant proteins Cys73-->Ser and Cys32-->Ser/Cys35-->Ser (at 1.65 and 1.8 A, respectively). Surprisingly, thioredoxin is dimeric in all four structures; the dimer is linked through a disulfide bond between Cys73 of each monomer, except in Cys73-->Ser where a hydrogen bond occurs. The thioredoxin active site is blocked by dimer formation. Conformational changes in the active site and dimer interface accompany oxidation of the active-site cysteines, Cys32 and Cys35. CONCLUSIONS: It has been suggested that a reduced pKa in the first cysteine (Cys32 in human thioredoxin) of the active-site sequence is important for modulation of the redox potential in thioredoxin. A hydrogen bond between the sulfhydryls of Cys32 and Cys35 may reduce the pKa of Cys32 and this pKa depression probably results in increased nucleophilicity of the Cys32 thiolate group. This nucleophilicity, in tum, is thought to be necessary for the role of thioredoxin in disulfide-bond reduction. The physiological role, if any, of thioredoxin dimer formation remains unknown. It is possible that dimerization may provide a mechanism for regulation of the protein, or a means of sensing oxidative stress.
15994304	X-ray snapshots of peptide processing in mutants of tricorn-interacting factor F1 from Thermoplasma acidophilum.	The tricorn-interacting factor F1 of the archaeon Thermoplasma acidophilum cleaves small hydrophobic peptide products of the proteasome and tricorn protease. F1 mutants of the active site residues that are involved in substrate recognition and catalysis displayed distinct activity patterns toward fluorogenic test substrates. Crystal structures of the mutant proteins complexed with peptides Phe-Leu, Pro-Pro, or Pro-Leu-Gly-Gly showed interaction of glutamates 213 and 245 with the N termini of the peptides and defined the S1 and S1' sites and the role of the catalytic residues. Evidence was found for processive peptide cleavage in the N-to-C direction, whereby the P1' product is translocated into the S1 site. A functional interaction of F1 with the tricorn protease was observed with the inactive F1 mutant G37A. Moreover, small angle x-ray scattering measurements for tricorn and inhibited F1 have been interpreted as formation of transient and substrate-induced complexes.
3656429	Refined structure of glutathione reductase at 1.54 A resolution.	The crystal structure of human glutathione reductase has been established at 1.54 A resolution using a restrained least-squares refinement method. Based on 77,690 independent reflections of better than 10 A resolution, a final R-factor of 18.6% was obtained with a model obeying standard geometry within 0.025 A in bond lengths and 2.4 degrees in bond angles. The final 2Fo-Fc electron density map allows for the distinction of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen atoms with temperature factors below about 25 A2. Apart from 461 amino acid residues and the prosthetic group FAD, the model contains 524 solvent molecules, about 118 of which can be considered an integral part of the enzyme. The largest solvent cluster is at the dimer interface and contains 104 interconnected solvent molecules, part of which are organized in a warped sheet-like structure. The main-chain dihedral angles are well-concentrated in the allowed regions of the Ramachandran plot. The spread of dihedral angles in beta-pleated sheets is much larger than in alpha-helices and especially in alpha-helix cores, indicating the higher plasticity of beta-structures. The analysis revealed a large amount of 3(10)-helix. The side-chain conformations cluster at the staggered positions, and show well-defined preferences. Also, a mobility gradient is observed for side-chains. Non-polar and polar side-chains show average temperature factor increases per bond of 10% and 25%, respectively. A number of alternative conformations of internal side-chains, in particular serines and methionines, have been detected. The extended FAD molecule also shows a mobility gradient between the very rigid flavin (mean value of B) = 8.7 A2) and the more mobile adenine (mean value of B = 16.2 A2). The entire active center is particularly well ordered, with temperature factors around 10 A2. The dimer interface consists of a rigid contact area, which is well conserved in the Escherichia coli enzyme, and a flexible area that is not. Altogether, the buried surfaces at the crystal contacts are half as large as at the dimer interface, but less specific. The refined structure shows clearly that there are no buried cations compensating the charge of the pyrophosphate moiety of FAD. The flavin deviates slightly from standard geometry, which is possibly caused by the polypeptide environment. In contrast to an earlier interpretation, atom N5 of the flavin can accommodate a proton, and it is conceivable that this proton proceeds to the redox-active disulfide.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
1553543	Response of a protein structure to cavity-creating mutations and its relation to the hydrophobic effect.	Six "cavity-creating" mutants, Leu46----Ala (L46A), L99A, L118A, L121A, L133A, and Phe153----Ala (F153A), were constructed within the hydrophobic core of phage T4 lysozyme. The substitutions decreased the stability of the protein at pH 3.0 by different amounts, ranging from 2.7 kilocalories per mole (kcal mol-1) for L46A and L121A to 5.0 kcal mol-1 for L99A. The double mutant L99A/F153A was also constructed and decreased in stability by 8.3 kcal mol-1. The x-ray structures of all of the variants were determined at high resolution. In every case, removal of the wild-type side chain allowed some of the surrounding atoms to move toward the vacated space but a cavity always remained, which ranged in volume from 24 cubic angstroms (A3) for L46A to 150 A3 for L99A. No solvent molecules were observed in any of these cavities. The destabilization of the mutant Leu----Ala proteins relative to wild type can be approximated by a constant term (approximately 2.0 kcal mol-1) plus a term that increases in proportion to the size of the cavity. The constant term is approximately equal to the transfer free energy of leucine relative to alanine as determined from partitioning between aqueous and organic solvents. The energy term that increases with the size of the cavity can be expressed either in terms of the cavity volume (24 to 33 cal mol-1 A-3) or in terms of the cavity surface area (20 cal mol-1 A-2). The results suggest how to reconcile a number of conflicting reports concerning the strength of the hydrophobic effect in proteins.
8009227	Structure of the RGD protein decorsin: conserved motif and distinct function in leech proteins that affect blood clotting.	The structure of the leech protein decorsin, a potent 39-residue antagonist of glycoprotein IIb-IIIa and inhibitor of platelet aggregation, was determined by nuclear magnetic resonance. In contrast to other disintegrins, the Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD)-containing region of decorsin is well defined. The three-dimensional structure of decorsin is similar to that of hirudin, an anticoagulant leech protein that potently inhibits thrombin. Amino acid sequence comparisons suggest that ornatin, another glycoprotein IIb-IIIa antagonist, and antistasin, a potent Factor Xa inhibitor and anticoagulant found in leeches, share the same structural motif. Although decorsin, hirudin, and antistasin all affect the blood clotting process and appear similar in structure, their mechanisms of action and epitopes important for binding to their respective targets are distinct.
1594573	Site-directed mutagenesis of pseudoazurin from Alcaligenes faecalis S-6; Pro80Ala mutant exhibits marked increase in reduction potential.	Pseudoazurin (a blue copper protein or cupredoxin) of a denitrifying bacterium Alcaligenes faecalis S-6 is a direct electron carrier for a Cu-containing nitrite reductase (NIR) of the same organism. Site-directed mutagenesis of the pseudoazurin was carried out using an Escherichia coli expression system. Replacement of Tyr74 by Phe to remove an internal hydrogen bond in the beta-barrel caused a slight decrease in heat stability as well as a requirement for a higher concentration of Cu2+ for production in the E. coli host. Exchange of Ala for Pro80 adjacent to His81, one of the four ligands binding a type I Cu atom, caused a marked increase in reduction potential by 139 mV without change in the optical absorption spectrum. The ability of the pseudoazurin to transfer electrons to NIR was markedly diminished but the apparent Km of NIR for pseudoazurin was not affected by the mutation. X-ray diffraction data collected on the oxidized and reduced forms of the Pro80Ala mutant show that a water molecule occupies the pocket created by the absent side chain. This observation suggests that the increase in reduction potential may be caused due to the increased solvent accessibility to the Cu atom. The electron density difference maps on these structures (at 2.0 A) show that this water moves during the change in oxidation state, and that there are small, but localized, conformational changes greater than 6.5 A from the copper site, as well as movement of both the Cu2+ and the cysteinate sulfur.
15196010	A molecular ruler for chain elongation catalyzed by octaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase and its structure-based engineering to produce unprecedented long chain trans-prenyl products.	Octaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase (OPPs) catalyzes consecutive condensation reactions of farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) with five molecules of isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) to generate C(40) octaprenyl pyrophosphate (OPP) which constitutes the side chain of menaquinone. We have previously reported the X-ray structure of OPPs from Thermotoga maritima, which is composed entirely of alpha-helices joined by connecting loops and is arranged with nine core helices around a large central cavity [Guo, R. T., Kuo, C. J., Ko, T. P., Chou, C. C., Shr, R. L., Liang, P. H., and Wang, A. H.-J. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 4903-4912]. A76 and S77 are located on top of the active site close to where FPP is bound. A76Y and A76Y/S77F OPPs mutants produce C(20), indicating that the substituted larger residues interfere with the substrate chain elongation. Surprisingly, the A76Y/S77F mutant synthesizes a larger amount of C(20) than the A76Y mutant. In the crystal structure of the A76Y/S77F mutant, F77 is pushed away by Y76, thereby creating more space between those two large amino acids to accommodate the C(20) product. A large F132 residue at the bottom of the tunnel-shaped active site serves as the "floor" and determines the final product chain length. The substitution of F132 with a small Ala, thereby removing the blockade, led to the synthesis of a C(50) product larger than that produced by the wild-type enzyme. On the basis of the structure, we have sequentially mutated the large amino acids, including F132, L128, I123, and D62, to Ala underneath the tunnel. The products of the F132A/L128A/I123A/D62A mutant reach C(95), beyond the largest chain length generated by all known trans-prenyltransferases. Further modifications of the enzyme reaction conditions, including new IPP derivatives, may allow the preparation of high-molecular weight polyprenyl products resembling the rubber molecule.
15667208	Disulfide bond mutagenesis and the structure and function of the head-to-tail macrocyclic trypsin inhibitor SFTI-1.	SFTI-1 is a novel 14 amino acid peptide comprised of a circular backbone constrained by three proline residues, a hydrogen-bond network, and a single disulfide bond. It is the smallest and most potent known Bowman-Birk trypsin inhibitor and the only one with a cyclic peptidic backbone. The solution structure of [ABA(3,11)]SFTI-1, a disulfide-deficient analogue of SFTI-1, has been determined by (1)H NMR spectroscopy. The lowest energy structures of native SFTI-1 and [ABA(3,11)]SFTI-1 are similar and superimpose with a root-mean-square deviation over the backbone and heavy atoms of 0.26 +/- 0.09 and 1.10 +/- 0.22 A, respectively. The disulfide bridge in SFTI-1 was found to be a minor determinant for the overall structure, but its removal resulted in a slightly weakened hydrogen-bonding network. To further investigate the role of the disulfide bridge, NMR chemical shifts for the backbone H(alpha) protons of two disulfide-deficient linear analogues of SFTI-1, [ABA(3,11)]SFTI-1[6,5] and [ABA(3,11)]SFTI-1[1,14] were measured. These correspond to analogues of the cleavage product of SFTI-1 and a putative biosynthetic precursor, respectively. In contrast with the cyclic peptide, it was found that the disulfide bridge is essential for maintaining the structure of these open-chain analogues. Overall, the hydrogen-bond network appears to be a crucial determinant of the structure of SFTI-1 analogues.
3112942	The three-dimensional structure of Asn102 mutant of trypsin: role of Asp102 in serine protease catalysis.	The structure of the Asn102 mutant of trypsin was determined in order to distinguish whether the reduced activity of the mutant at neutral pH results from an altered active site conformation or from an inability to stabilize a positive charge on the active site histidine. The active site structure of the Asn102 mutant of trypsin is identical to the native enzyme with respect to the specificity pocket, the oxyanion hole, and the orientation of the nucleophilic serine. The observed decrease in rate results from the loss of nucleophilicity of the active site serine. This decreased nucleophilicity may result from stabilization of a His57 tautomer that is unable to accept the serine hydroxyl proton.
15723541	Kinetic and crystallographic analysis of active site mutants of Escherichia coli gamma-aminobutyrate aminotransferase.	The E. coli isozyme of gamma-aminobutyrate aminotransferase (GABA-AT) is a tetrameric pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme that catalyzes transamination between primary amines and alpha-keto acids. The roles of the active site residues V241, E211, and I50 in the GABA-AT mechanism have been probed by site-directed mutagenesis. The beta-branched side chain of V241 facilitates formation of external aldimine intermediates with primary amine substrates, while E211 provides charge compensation of R398 selectively in the primary amine half-reaction and I50 forms a hydrophobic lid at the top of the substrate binding site. The structures of the I50Q, V241A, and E211S mutants were solved by X-ray crystallography to resolutions of 2.1, 2.5, and 2.52 A, respectively. The structure of GABA-AT is similar in overall fold and active site structure to that of dialkylglycine decarboxylase, which catalyzes both transamination and decarboxylation half-reactions in its normal catalytic cycle. Therefore, an attempt was made to convert GABA-AT into a decarboxylation-dependent aminotransferase similar to dialkylglycine decarboxylase by systematic mutation of E. coli GABA-AT active site residues. Two of the twelve mutants presented, E211S/I50G/C77K and E211S/I50H/V80D, have approximately 10-fold higher decarboxylation activities than the wild-type enzyme, and the E211S/I50H/V80D has formally changed the reaction specificity to that of a decarboxylase.
12549906	Structural and biochemical studies of inhibitor binding to human cytomegalovirus protease.	Herpesvirus protease is required for the life cycle of the virus and is an attractive target for the design and development of new anti-herpes agents. The protease belongs to a new class of serine proteases, with a novel backbone fold and a unique Ser-His-His catalytic triad. Here we report the crystal structures of human cytomegalovirus protease in complex with two peptidomimetic inhibitors. The structures reveal a new hydrogen-bonding interaction between the main chain carbonyl of the P(5) residue and the main chain amide of amino acid 137 of the protease, which is important for the binding affinity of the inhibitor. Conformational flexibility was observed in the S(3) pocket of the enzyme, and this is supported by our characterization of several mutants in this pocket. One of the structures is at 2.5 A resolution, allowing us for the first time to locate ordered solvent molecules in the inhibitor complex. The presence of two solvent molecules in the active site may have implications for the design of new inhibitors against this enzyme. Favorable and stereospecific interactions have been established in the S(1)' pocket for one of these inhibitors.
8918534	Structural analysis of a mutation in canine parvovirus which controls antigenicity and host range.	A single mutation in canine parvovirus (CPV) of VP2 residue 300 from alanine to aspartic acid causes a loss of canine host range and alters the antigenic properties of the virus. The three-dimensional structure of this mutant has been solved to 3.25 A resolution. Crystals of full particles were triclinic, with cell dimensions of a = 267.6, b = 268.5, c = 274.3 A. alpha = 61.9, beta = 62.6, and gamma = 60.2 degrees. The native structure of CPV was used as an initial model. Phases were improved by real-space electron density averaging. In spite of the relative low percentage of observed reflections (32.5% of the data between 15.0 and 3.25 A resolution), the presence of 60-fold noncrystallographic redundancy allowed the averaging procedure to converge smoothly. The mutant aspartic acid at residue 300 forms a salt bridge with Arg81 in an icosahedrally threefold-related subunit, inducing local changes within the antigenic site B on the CPV surface. In addition, the loop between residues 359 and 374 adopts a conformation similar to that displayed by feline panleukopenia virus. The ability of the Ala300-->Asp mutant to evade antibody binding can be associated with the change of charge distribution and structure in the antigenic binding site. The variation in host range behavior may be due to the increased stability as a result of formation of the salt bridge between adjacent subunits.
11301006	Structural basis of the redox switch in the OxyR transcription factor.	The Escherichia coli OxyR transcription factor senses H2O2 and is activated through the formation of an intramolecular disulfide bond. Here we present the crystal structures of the regulatory domain of OxyR in its reduced and oxidized forms, determined at 2.7 A and 2.3 A resolutions, respectively. In the reduced form, the two redox-active cysteines are separated by approximately 17 A. Disulfide bond formation in the oxidized form results in a significant structural change in the regulatory domain. The structural remodeling, which leads to different oligomeric associations, accounts for the redox-dependent switch in OxyR and provides a novel example of protein regulation by "fold editing" through a reversible disulfide bond formation within a folded domain.
15931226	Structural characterization of the molecular platform for type III secretion system assembly.	Type III secretion systems (TTSSs) are multi-protein macromolecular 'machines' that have a central function in the virulence of many Gram-negative pathogens by directly mediating the secretion and translocation of bacterial proteins (termed effectors) into the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells. Most of the 20 unique structural components constituting this secretion apparatus are highly conserved among animal and plant pathogens and are also evolutionarily related to proteins in the flagellar-specific export system. Recent electron microscopy experiments have revealed the gross 'needle-shaped' morphology of the TTSS, yet a detailed understanding of the structural characteristics and organization of these protein components within the bacterial membranes is lacking. Here we report the 1.8-A crystal structure of EscJ from enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC), a member of the YscJ/PrgK family whose oligomerization represents one of the earliest events in TTSS assembly. Crystal packing analysis and molecular modelling indicate that EscJ could form a large 24-subunit 'ring' superstructure with extensive grooves, ridges and electrostatic features. Electron microscopy, labelling and mass spectrometry studies on the orthologous Salmonella typhimurium PrgK within the context of the assembled TTSS support the stoichiometry, membrane association and surface accessibility of the modelled ring. We propose that the YscJ/PrgK protein family functions as an essential molecular platform for TTSS assembly.
16220560	On the importance of carbohydrate-aromatic interactions for the molecular recognition of oligosaccharides by proteins: NMR studies of the structure and binding affinity of AcAMP2-like peptides with non-natural naphthyl and fluoroaromatic residues.	The specific interaction of a variety of modified hevein domains to chitooligosaccharides has been studied by NMR spectroscopy in order to assess the importance of aromatic-carbohydrate interactions for the molecular recognition of neutral sugars. These mutant AcAMP2-like peptides, which have 4-fluoro-phenylalanine, tryptophan, or 2-naphthylalanine at the key interacting positions, have been prepared by solid-phase synthesis. Their three-dimensional structures, when bound to the chitin-derived trisaccharide, have been deduced by NMR spectroscopy. By using DYANA and restrained molecular dynamics simulations with the AMBER 5.0 force field, the three-dimensional structures of the protein-sugar complexes have been obtained. The thermodynamic analysis of the interactions that occur upon complex formation have also been carried out. Regarding binding affinity, the obtained data have permitted the deduction that the larger the aromatic group, the higher the association constant and the binding enthalpy. In all cases, entropy opposes binding. In contrast, deactivation of the aromatic rings by attaching fluorine atoms decreases the binding affinity, with a concomitant decrease in enthalpy. The role of the chemical nature of the aromatic ring for establishing sugar contacts has been thus evaluated.
9862804	Structures of the psychrophilic Alteromonas haloplanctis alpha-amylase give insights into cold adaptation at a molecular level.	Background:. Enzymes from psychrophilic (cold-adapted) microorganisms operate at temperatures close to 0 degreesC, where the activity of their mesophilic and thermophilic counterparts is drastically reduced. It has generally been assumed that thermophily is associated with rigid proteins, whereas psychrophilic enzymes have a tendency to be more flexible. Results:. Insights into the cold adaptation of proteins are gained on the basis of a psychrophilic protein's molecular structure. To this end, we have determined the structure of the recombinant form of a psychrophilic alpha-amylase from Alteromonas haloplanctis at 2.4 A resolution. We have compared this with the structure of the wild-type enzyme, recently solved at 2.0 A resolution, and with available structures of their mesophilic counterparts. These comparative studies have enabled us to identify possible determinants of cold adaptation. Conclusions:. We propose that an increased resilience of the molecular surface and a less rigid protein core, with less interdomain interactions, are determining factors of the conformational flexibility that allows efficient enzyme catalysis in cold environments.
8917445	Chemically and conformationally authentic active domain of human tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 refolded from bacterial inclusion bodies.	The aggregation of recombinant proteins into inclusion bodies is a major problem for expression in bacterial systems. The inclusion bodies must be solubilized and the denatured protein renatured if an active molecule is to be recovered. We have developed such a procedure for the active N-terminal domain of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 [TIMP-2-(1-127)], a small mammalian protein containing three disulfide bonds. Conditions for its renaturation were determined by studying the refolding behaviour of reduced and denatured mammalian-cell-expressed TIMP-(1-127) by intrinsic fluorescence. This strategy allows the development of a refolding protocol before generation of a bacterial expression system, and allows rapid and systematic optimization of each refolding variable by assessing its effect on the rate and extent of the refolding reaction. TIMP-(1-127) was expressed at high levels in Escherichia coli, and refolded from TIMP-2-(1-127) inclusion bodies, by means of the method developed with mammalian-cell-expressed protein, to give a refolding efficiency of 30-40% and a final yield of 11-14 mg purified protein/l culture. The chemical structure and conformation of this material was characterized by electrospray mass spectrometry and two-dimensional 1H-NMR; no significant differences were found between it and the native protein. Mass analysis of uniformly 13C-labeled and 15N-labeled protein was used to help identify a mistranslated TIMP-(1-127) contaminant in the purified refolded sample. This technique provides additional information on the nature of the modification and allows a distinction to be made between those modifications that are cell derived, and those that arise from subsequent handling of the protein.
12230574	NblA from Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 is a mostly alpha-helical protein undergoing reversible trimerization in solution.	The nblA family of genes encodes for small proteins necessary for the ordered degradation of phycobilisomes under certain stress conditions, a process known as chlorosis. Genes homologous to nblA seem to occur in all phycobilisome-containing organisms. However, to date, no molecular mechanism is known for the action of NblA, nor have the gene products been characterized to understand the physical properties of the molecule and thus help elucidate the mechanism on a structural basis. In this study we report on the first characterization of an NblA-homologous gene product. The chromosomal gene from the cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 was cloned, heterologously expressed in Escherichia coli and purified to apparent homogeneity. This allowed the protein to be characterized by analytical ultracentrifugation and CD spectroscopy. These experiments show that the NblA protein has a mostly alpha-helical structure, undergoing an association reaction of folded monomers to form trimers in solution. No dimers are detectable.
8395021	Structure of gelsolin segment 1-actin complex and the mechanism of filament severing.	The structure of the segment 1 domain of gelsolin, a protein that fragments actin filaments in cells, is reported in complex with actin. Segment 1 binds monomer using an apolar patch rimmed by hydrogen bonds in a cleft between actin domains. On the actin filament model it binds tangentially, disrupting only those contacts between adjacent subunits in one helical strand. The segment 1 fold is general for all segments of the gelsolin family because the conserved residues form the core of the structure. It also provides a basis for understanding the origin of an amyloidosis caused by a gelsolin variant.
15299834	Binding of the antiviral drug WIN51711 to the sabin strain of type 3 poliovirus: structural comparison with drug binding in rhinovirus 14.	The crystal structure of the Sabin strain of type 3 poliovirus (P3/Sabin) complexed with the antiviral drug WIN51711 has been determined at 2.9 A resolution. Drugs of this kind are known to inhibit the uncoating of the virus during infection, by stabilizing the capsid against receptor-induced conformational changes. The electron density for the bound drug is very well defined so that its position and orientation are unambiguous. The drug binds in a nearly extended conformation, slightly bent in the middle, in a blind pocket formed predominantly by hydrophobic residues in the core of the beta-barrel of capsid protein VP1. Comparisons between this structure, the corresponding drug complex in human rhinovirus 14 (HRV 14), and the native structures of both viruses demonstrate that the binding of WIN51711 has markedly different effects on the structures of these two viruses. Unlike HRV14, wherein large conformational changes are observed in the coat protein after drug binding, the binding of this drug in poliovirus does not induce any significant conformational changes in the structure of the capsid protein, though the drug has a greater inhibitory effect in P3/Sabin than in HRV14. The implications of this result for the mechanism of capsid stabilization are discussed.
11387196	A structural pathway for activation of the kinesin motor ATPase.	Molecular motors move along actin or microtubules by rapidly hydrolyzing ATP and undergoing changes in filament-binding affinity with steps of the nucleotide hydrolysis cycle. It is generally accepted that motor binding to its filament greatly increases the rate of ATP hydrolysis, but the structural changes in the motor associated with ATPase activation are not known. To identify the conformational changes underlying motor movement on its filament, we solved the crystal structures of three kinesin mutants that decouple nucleotide and microtubule binding by the motor, and block microtubule-activated, but not basal, ATPase activity. Conformational changes in the structures include a disordered loop and helices in the switch I region and a visible switch II loop, which is disordered in wild-type structures. Switch I moved closer to the bound nucleotide in two mutant structures, perturbing water-mediated interactions with the Mg2+. This could weaken Mg2+ binding and accelerate ADP release to activate the motor ATPASE: The structural changes we observe define a signaling pathway within the motor for ATPase activation that is likely to be essential for motor movement on microtubules.
8642596	Crystal structures of CO-, deoxy- and met-myoglobins at various pH values.	The distal histidine residue, His64(E7), and the proximal histidine residue, His93(F8), in myoglobin (Mb) are important for the function of the protein. For example, the increase in the association rate constant for CO binding at low pH has been suggested to be caused by the protonation of these histidine residues. In order to investigate the influence of protonation on the structure of myoglobin, we determined the crystal structures of sperm whale myoglobin to 2.0 A or better in different states of ligation (MbCO, deoxyMb and metMb) at pH values of 4, 5 and 6. The most dramatic change found at low pH is that His64 swings out of the distal pocket in the MbCO structure at pH 4, opening a direct channel from the solvent to the iron atom. This rotation seems to be facilitated by conformational changes in the CD corner. The benzyl side-chain of Phe46(CD4), which has been suggested to be a critical residue in controlling the rotation of His64, moves away from His64 at pH 4 in the deoxyMb structure, allowing more free rotation of His64. Arg45(CD3) is also important for the dynamics of myoglobin, since it influences the pK(a) of His64 and forms a hydrogen bond lattice that hinders the rotation of His64 at neutral pH. This hydrogen-bond lattice disappears at low pH. Although His64 rotates out of the distal pocket in the MbCO structure at pH 4, leaving more space for the CO ligand, the Fe-C-O angle refines to about 130 degrees, the same as those at pH 5 and 6. In the MbCO structure at pH 4, significant conformational changes appear in the EF corner. The peptide plane between Lys79(EF2) and Gly80(EF3) flips about 150 degrees. The occupancy of this conformation in the MbCO structures increases with decreases in pH. On the proximal side of the heme, the bond between the heme iron atom and N(epsilon) of His93 remains intact under the experimental conditions in the MbCO and deoxyMb structures, but appears elongated in the metMb structure at pH 4, representing either a weakened bond or the breakage of the bond in some fraction of the molecules in the crystal.
4843141	The structure of the oxidized form of clostridial flavodoxin at 1.9-A resolution.	null
11130079	Structure of the bacteriophage phi29 DNA packaging motor.	Motors generating mechanical force, powered by the hydrolysis of ATP, translocate double-stranded DNA into preformed capsids (proheads) of bacterial viruses and certain animal viruses. Here we describe the motor that packages the double-stranded DNA of the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage phi29 into a precursor capsid. We determined the structure of the head-tail connector--the central component of the phi29 DNA packaging motor--to 3.2 A resolution by means of X-ray crystallography. We then fitted the connector into the electron densities of the prohead and of the partially packaged prohead as determined using cryo-electron microscopy and image reconstruction analysis. Our results suggest that the prohead plus dodecameric connector, prohead RNA, viral ATPase and DNA comprise a rotary motor with the head-prohead RNA-ATPase complex acting as a stator, the DNA acting as a spindle, and the connector as a ball-race. The helical nature of the DNA converts the rotary action of the connector into translation of the DNA.
16192572	Characterization of the metal ion binding site in the anti-terminator protein, HutP, of Bacillus subtilis.	HutP is an RNA-binding protein that regulates the expression of the histidine utilization (hut) operon in Bacillus subtilis, by binding to cis-acting regulatory sequences on hut mRNA. It requires L-histidine and an Mg2+ ion for binding to the specific sequence within the hut mRNA. In the present study, we show that several divalent cations can mediate the HutP-RNA interactions. The best divalent cations were Mn2+, Zn2+ and Cd2+, followed by Mg2+, Co2+ and Ni2+, while Cu2+, Yb2+ and Hg2+ were ineffective. In the HutP-RNA interactions, divalent cations cannot be replaced by monovalent cations, suggesting that a divalent metal ion is required for mediating the protein-RNA interactions. To clarify their importance, we have crystallized HutP in the presence of three different metal ions (Mg2+, Mn2+ and Ba2+), which revealed the importance of the metal ion binding site. Furthermore, these analyses clearly demonstrated how the metal ions cause the structural rearrangements that are required for the hut mRNA recognition.
7972015	Activated Ras interacts with the Ral guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator.	The yeast two-hybrid system was used to identify proteins that interact with Ras. The H-Ras protein was found to interact with a guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator (GDS) that has been previously shown to regulate guanine nucleotide exchange on another member of the Ras protein family, Ral. The interaction is mediated by the C-terminal, noncatalytic segment of the RalGDS and can be detected both in vivo, using the two-hybrid system, and in vitro, with purified recombinant proteins. The interaction of the RalGDS C-terminal segment with Ras is specific, dependent on activation of Ras by GTP, and blocked by a mutation that affects Ras effector function. These characteristics are similar to those previously demonstrated for the interaction between Ras and its putative effector, Raf, suggesting that the RalGDS may also be a Ras effector. Consistent with this idea, the RalGDS was found to inhibit the binding of Raf to Ras.
15299790	Difference refinement: obtaining differences between two related structures.	There are many examples in macromolecular crystallography where interest focuses on the differences between a previously determined 'native' structure and a nearly isomorphous 'variant'. In such cases, a useful approach to atomic refinement of the variant structure is through weighted least-squares minimization of the residual between the observed and calculated differences in amplitudes of structure factors, a strategy first used in the refinement of deoxycobalt hemoglobin [Fermi, Perutz, Dickinson & Chien (1982). J. Mol. Biol. 155, 495-505] and termed 'difference refinement'. For cases in which the modeling errors for the native and variant structures are correlated, theoretical arguments indicate that difference refinement should lead to improved estimates of structural differences when compared with conventional independent refinement. Tests employing simulated peptide data sets and real data from a wild-type protein and a mutant show that difference refinement can substantially reduce errors in the differences between structures when compared with independent refinement. The algorithm is very easy to implement and does not increase the computational demands of refinement.
11867764	Conserved tryptophan in the core domain of transglutaminase is essential for catalytic activity.	Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is a distinctive member of the family of Ca2+-dependent enzymes recognized mostly by their abilities to catalyze the posttranslational crosslinking of proteins. TG2 uniquely binds and hydrolyzes GTP; binding GTP inhibits its crosslinking activity but allows it to function in signal transduction (hence the G(h) designation). The core domain of TG2 (residues 139-471, rat) comprises the papain-like catalytic triad and the GTP-binding domain (residues 159-173) and contains almost all of the conserved tryptophans of the protein. Examining point mutations at Trp positions 180, 241, 278, 332, and 337 showed that, upon binding 2'-(or 3')-O-(N-methylanthraniloyl)GTP (mantGTP), the Phe-332 mutant was the weakest (35% less than wild type) in resonance energy transfer from the protein (lambda(exc, max) = 290 nm) to the mant fluorophore (lambda(em) = 444 nm) and had a reduced affinity for mantGTP. Trp-332, situated near the catalytic center and the nucleotide-binding area of TG2, may be part of the allosteric relay machinery that transmits negative effector signals from nucleotide binding to the active center of TG2. A most important observation was that, whereas no enzyme activity could be detected when Trp-241 was replaced with Ala or Gln, partial preservation of catalytic activity was seen with substitutions by Tyr > Phe > His. The results indicate that Trp-241 is essential for catalysis, possibly by stabilizing the transition states by H-bonding, quadrupole-ion, or van der Waals interactions. This contrasts with the evolutionarily related papain family of cysteine proteases, which uses Gln-19 (papain) for stabilizing the transition state.
3663686	The roles of conserved aromatic amino-acid residues in the active site of human lysozyme: a site-specific mutagenesis study.	In order to probe the roles of Tyr-63, Trp-64 and Trp-109 in the active site of human lysozyme (peptidoglycan N-acetylmuramoylhydrolase, EC 3.2.1.17), six human lysozymes containing a mutation, Tyr-63 to Leu, Trp-64 to Phe or Tyr, Trp-109 to Phe or Tyr, and Glu-35 to Asp, were newly synthesized and their immunological and enzymatical activities were examined in comparison with the native enzyme. Enzymatic characterization indicated: (i) that the existences of an aromatic residue at position 63 and a tryptophan residue at position 64 are essential for the effective hydrolysis of glycol chitin substrate, but not for the lysis of bacterial substrate; (ii) that the conversion of Trp-109 to Phe or Tyr reduces the maximal velocity of the lytic reaction to 25% of the wild-type enzyme; however, the apparent affinity constant is not affected. Further, the difference between the activity against the charged substrate and that against the non-charged substrate was discussed from a viewpoint of the electrostatic interaction between enzyme and substrate.
3072018	The engineering of binding affinity at metal ion binding sites for the stabilization of proteins: subtilisin as a test case.	A weak Ca2+ binding site in the bacterial serine protease subtilisin BPN' (EC 3.4.21.14) was chosen as a model to explore the feasibility of stabilizing a protein by increasing the binding affinity at a metal ion binding site. The existence of this weak Ca2+ binding site was first discovered through a study of the rate of thermal inactivation of wild-type subtilisin BPN' at 65 degrees C as a function of the free [Ca2+]. Increasing the [Ca2+] in the range 0.10-100 mM caused a 100-fold decrease in the rate of thermal inactivation. The data were found to closely fit a theoretical titration curve for a single Ca2+ specific binding site with an apparent log Ka = 1.49. A series of refined X-ray crystal structures (R less than or equal to 0.15, 1.7 A) of subtilisin in the presence of 0.0, 25.0, and 40.0 mM CaCl2 has allowed a detailed structural characterization of this Ca2+ binding site. Negatively charged side chains were introduced in the vicinity of the bound Ca2+ by changing Pro 172 and Gly 131 to Asp residues through site-directed and random mutagenesis techniques, respectively. These changes were found to increase the affinity of the Ca2+ binding site by 3.4- and 2-fold, respectively, when compared with the wild-type protein (ionic strength = 0.10). X-ray studies of these new variants of subtilisin revealed the carboxylate side chains to be 6.8 and 13.2 A, respectively, from the bound Ca2+. These distances and the degree of enhanced binding are consistent with simple electrostatic theory.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
12963370	ALS mutants of human superoxide dismutase form fibrous aggregates via framework destabilization.	Many point mutations in human Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD) cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disorder in heterozygotes. Here we show that these mutations cluster in protein regions influencing architectural integrity. Furthermore, crystal structures of SOD wild-type and FALS mutant H43R proteins uncover resulting local framework defects. Characterizations of beta-barrel (H43R) and dimer interface (A4V) FALS mutants reveal reduced stability and drastically increased aggregation propensity. Moreover, electron and atomic force microscopy indicate that these defects promote the formation of filamentous aggregates. The filaments resemble those seen in neurons of FALS patients and bind both Congo red and thioflavin T, suggesting the presence of amyloid-like, stacked beta-sheet interactions. These results support free-cysteine-independent aggregation of FALS mutant SOD as an integral part of FALS pathology. They furthermore provide a molecular basis for the single FALS disease phenotype resulting from mutations of diverse side-chains throughout the protein: many FALS mutations reduce structural integrity, lowering the energy barrier for fibrous aggregation.
7492558	X-ray crystallographic studies on hexameric insulins in the presence of helix-stabilizing agents, thiocyanate, methylparaben, and phenol.	Three X-ray crystallographic studies have been carried out on pig insulin in the presence of three ligands, thiocyanate, methylparaben (methyl p-hydroxybenzoate), and phenol. In each case, rhombohedral crystals were obtained, which diffracted to 1.8, 1.9, and 2.3 A, respectively. Each crystal structure was very similar to that of 4-zinc pig insulin, which was used as a starting model for PROLSQ refinement (Collaborative Computational Project, Number 4, 1994). The R factors for the refined structures of thiocyanate insulin, methylparaben insulin, and phenol insulin were 19.6, 18.4, and 19.1, respectively. Each crystal structure consists of T3R3f insulin hexamers with two zinc ions per hexamer. In the R3f trimer of the thiocyanate insulin hexamer, one thiocyanate ion is coordinated to the zinc on the hexamer 3-fold axis, but there is no evidence of zinc ion binding in the off-axis zinc ion sites seen in the 4-zinc pig insulin structure. In the methylparaben insulin and phenol insulin hexamers, the phenolic ligands are bound at the dimer-dimer interfaces in the R3f trimers in a manner similar to that of phenol in R6 phenol insulin. The binding of methylparaben appears to make the hexamer more compact by drawing the A and the B chains closer together in the binding site. In all three structures presented herein, the conformations of the first three residues of the B chain in the R3f trimer are extended rather than alpha-helical, as is seen in R6 phenol insulin. The energetics of ligand binding in the insulin hexamer are discussed.
15289463	The X-ray structure of the papillomavirus helicase in complex with its molecular matchmaker E2.	DNA replication of the papillomaviruses is specified by cooperative binding of two proteins to the ori site: the enhancer E2 and the viral initiator E1, a distant member of the AAA+ family of proteins. Formation of this prereplication complex is an essential step toward the construction of a functional, multimeric E1 helicase and DNA melting. To understand how E2 interacts with E1 to regulate this process, we have solved the X-ray structure of a complex containing the HPV18 E2 activation domain bound to the helicase domain of E1. Modeling the monomers of E1 to a hexameric helicase shows that E2 blocks hexamerization of E1 by shielding a region of the E1 oligomerization surface and stabilizing a conformation of E1 that is incompatible with ATP binding. Further biochemical experiments and structural analysis show that ATP is an allosteric effector of the dissociation of E2 from E1. Our data provide the first molecular insights into how a protein can regulate the assembly of an oligomeric AAA+ complex and explain at a structural level why E2, after playing a matchmaker role by guiding E1 to the DNA, must dissociate for subsequent steps of initiation to occur. Building on previously proposed ideas, we discuss how our data advance current models for the conversion of E1 in the prereplication complex to a hexameric helicase assembly.
12909636	An essential role for aspartate 264 in catalysis by tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from Escherichia coli.	tRNA-guanine transglycosylase (TGT) catalyzes a post-transcriptional base-exchange reaction involved in the incorporation of the modified base queuine (Q) into the wobble position of certain tRNAs. Catalysis by TGT occurs through a double-displacement mechanism that involves the formation of a covalent enzyme-RNA intermediate (Kittendorf, J. D., Barcomb, L. M., Nonekowski, S. T., and Garcia, G. A. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 14123-14133). The TGT chemical mechanism requires the protonation of the displaced guanine and the deprotonation of the incoming heterocyclic base. Based on its position in the active site, it is likely that aspartate 264 is involved in these proton transfer events. To investigate this possibility, site-directed mutagenesis was employed to convert aspartate 264 to alanine, asparagine, glutamate, glutamine, lysine, and histidine. Biochemical characterization of these TGT mutants revealed that only the conservative glutamate mutant retained catalytic activity, with Km values for both tRNA and guanine 3-fold greater than those for wild-type, whereas the kcat was depressed by an order of magnitude. Furthermore, of these six TGT mutants, only the TGT(D264E) was capable of forming a TGT.RNA covalent intermediate; however, unlike wild-type TGT, only hydroxylamine is capable of cleaving the TGT(D264E).RNA covalent complex. In an effort to better understand the unique biochemical properties of the D264E TGT mutant, we solved the crystal structure of the Zymomonas mobilis TGT with the analogous mutation (D280E). The results of these studies support two roles for aspartate 264 in catalysis by TGT, protonation of the leaving guanine and deprotonation of the incoming preQ1.
16337651	The allosteric mechanism of yeast chorismate mutase: a dynamic analysis.	The effector-regulated allosteric mechanism of yeast chorismate mutase (YCM) was studied by normal mode analysis and targeted molecular dynamics. The normal mode analysis shows that the conformational change between YCM in the R state and in the T state can be represented by a relatively small number of low-frequency modes. This suggests that the transition is coded in the structure and is likely to have a low energetic barrier. Quantitative comparisons (i.e. frequencies) between the low-frequency modes of YCM with and without effectors (modeled structures) reveal that the binding of Trp increases the global flexibility, whereas Tyr decreases global flexibility. The targeted molecular dynamics simulation of substrate analog release from the YCM active site suggests that a series of residues are critical for orienting and "recruiting" the substrate. The simulation led to the switching of a series of substrate-release-coupled salt-bridge partners in the ligand-binding domain; similar changes occur in the transition between YCM R-state and T-state crystal structures. Thus, the normal mode analysis and targeted molecular dynamics results provide evidence that the effectors regulate YCM activity by influencing the global flexibility. The change in flexibility is coupled to the binding of substrate to the T state and release of the product from the R state, respectively.
11224571	The L3 loop and C-terminal phosphorylation jointly define Smad protein trimerization.	Smad proteins mediate the transforming growth factor beta responses. C-terminal phosphorylation of R-Smads leads to the recruitment of Smad4 and the formation of active signaling complexes. We investigated the mechanism of phosphorylation-induced Smad complex formation with an activating pseudo-phosphorylated Smad3. Pseudo-phosphorylated Smad3 has a greater propensity to homotrimerize, and recruits Smad4 to form a heterotrimer containing two Smad3 and one Smad4. The trimeric interaction is mediated through conserved interfaces to which tumorigenic mutations map. Furthermore, a conserved Arg residue within the L3 loop, located near the C-terminal phosphorylation sites of the neighboring subunit, is essential for trimerization. We propose that the phosphorylated C-terminal residues interact with the L3 loop of the neighboring subunit to stabilize the trimer interaction.
10848964	Crystal structure of cambialistic superoxide dismutase from porphyromonas gingivalis.	The crystal structure of cambialistic superoxide dismutase (SOD) from Porphyromonas gingivalis, which exhibits full activity with either Fe or Mn at the active site, has been determined at 1.8-A resolution by molecular replacement and refined to a crystallographic R factor of 17.9% (Rfree 22.3%). The crystals belong to the space group P212121 (a = 75.5 A, b = 102.7 A, c = 99.6 A) with four identical subunits in the asymmetric unit. Each pair of subunits forms a compact dimer, but not a tetramer, with 222 point symmetry. Each subunit has 191 amino-acid residues most of which are visible in electron density maps, and consists of seven alpha helices and one three-stranded antiparallel beta sheet. The metal ion, a 3 : 1 mixture of Fe and Mn, is coordinated with five ligands (His27, His74, His161, Asp157, and water) arranged at the vertices of a trigonal bipyramid. Although the overall structural features, including the metal coordination geometry, are similar to those found in other single-metal containing SODs, P. gingivalis SOD more closely resembles the dimeric Fe-SODs from Escherichia coli rather than another cambialistic SOD from Propionibacterium shermanii, which itself is rather similar to other tetrameric SODs.
7918391	Solution structure of the active domain of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2. A new member of the OB fold protein family.	Homonuclear two-dimensional and three-dimensional 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy has been used to obtain essentially complete sequence-specific assignments for 123 of the 127 amino acid residues present in the truncated form of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 (delta TIMP-2), the active N-terminal domain of the protein. Analysis of the through-space nuclear Overhauser effect data obtained for delta TIMP-2 allowed determination of both the secondary structure of the domain and also a low-resolution tertiary structure defining the protein backbone topology. The protein contains a five-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet that is rolled over on itself to form a closed beta-barrel, and two short helices which pack close to one another on the same barrel face. A comparison of the delta TIMP-2 structure with other known protein folds reveals that the beta-barrel topology is homologous to that seen in proteins of the oligosaccharide/oligonucleotide binding (OB) fold family. The common structural features include the number of beta-strands and their arrangement, the beta-barrel shear number, an interstrand hydrogen bond network, the packing of the hydrophobic core, and a conserved beta-bulge. Superpositions of the beta-barrels from delta TIMP-2 and two previously known members of the OB protein fold family (staphylococcal nuclease and Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin) confirmed the similarity in beta-barrel topology. The three-dimensional structure of delta TIMP-2 has allowed a more detailed interpretation than was previously possible of the functional significance of available protein sequence and site-directed mutagenesis data for the TIMP family. Furthermore, the structure has revealed conserved surface regions of potential functional importance.
10811226	Structural insights into the stereochemistry of the cyclooxygenase reaction.	Cyclooxygenases are bifunctional enzymes that catalyse the first committed step in the synthesis of prostaglandins, thromboxanes and other eicosanoids. The two known cyclooxygenases isoforms share a high degree of amino-acid sequence similarity, structural topology and an identical catalytic mechanism. Cyclooxygenase enzymes catalyse two sequential reactions in spatially distinct, but mechanistically coupled active sites. The initial cyclooxygenase reaction converts arachidonic acid (which is achiral) to prostaglandin G2 (which has five chiral centres). The subsequent peroxidase reaction reduces prostaglandin G2 to prostaglandin H2. Here we report the co-crystal structures of murine apo-cyclooxygenase-2 in complex with arachidonic acid and prostaglandin. These structures suggest the molecular basis for the stereospecificity of prostaglandin G2 synthesis.
7493956	Crystallographic studies of the interaction of cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase from Bacillus circulans strain 251 with natural substrates and products.	Asp-229, Glu-257, and Asp-328 constitute the catalytic residues in cyclodextrin glycosyl transferase from Bacillus circulans strain 251. Via site-directed mutagenesis constructed D229N, E257Q, and D328N mutant proteins showed a 4,000-60,000-fold reduction of cyclization activity. A D229N/E257Q double mutant showed a 700,000-fold reduction and was crystallized for use in soaking experiments with alpha-cyclodextrin. Crystal structures were determined of wild type CGTase soaked at elevated pH with alpha-cyclodextrin (resolution, 2.1 A) and maltoheptaose (2.4 A). In addition, structures at cryogenic temperature were solved of the unliganded enzyme (2.2 A) and of the D229N/E257Q mutant after soaking with alpha-cyclodextrin (2.6 A). In the crystals soaked in alpha-cyclodextrin and maltoheptaose, a maltotetraose molecule is observed to bind in the active site. Residue 229 is at hydrogen bonding distance from the C-6 hydroxyl group of the sugar, which after cleavage will contain the new reducing end. In the D229N/E257Q double mutant structure, two alpha-cyclodextrins are observed to replace two maltoses at the E-domain, thus providing structural information on product inhibition via binding to the enzyme's raw starch binding domain.
14617621	A substrate-induced switch in the reaction mechanism of a thermophilic esterase: kinetic evidences and structural basis.	The reaction mechanism of the esterase 2 (EST2) from Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius was studied at the kinetic and structural level to shed light on the mechanism of activity and substrate specificity increase previously observed in its double mutant M211S/R215L. In particular, the values of kinetic constants (k1, k(-1), k2, and k3) along with activation energies (E1, E(-1), E2, and E3) were measured for wild type and mutant enzyme. The previously suggested substrate-induced switch in the reaction mechanism from kcat=k3 with a short acyl chain substrate (p-nitrophenyl hexanoate) to kcat=k2 with a long acyl chain substrate (p-nitrophenyl dodecanoate) was validated. The inhibition afforded by an irreversible inhibitor (1-hexadecanesulfonyl chloride), structurally related to p-nitrophenyl dodecanoate, was studied by kinetic analysis. Moreover the three-dimensional structure of the double mutant bound to this inhibitor was determined, providing essential information on the enzyme mechanism. In fact, structural analysis explained the observed substrate-induced switch because of an inversion in the binding mode of the long acyl chain derivatives with respect to the acyl- and alcohol-binding sites.
7982928	Probing protein-protein interactions. The ribose-binding protein in bacterial transport and chemotaxis.	A number of mutations at Gly134 of the periplasmic ribose-binding protein of Escherichia coli were examined by a combined biochemical and structural approach. Different mutations gave rise to different patterns of effects on the chemotaxis and transport functions. The smallest residue (alanine) had the least effect on transport, whereas large hydrophobic residues had the smallest effect on chemotaxis. Comparison of the x-ray crystal structure of the G134R mutant protein (2.5-A resolution) to that of the wild type (1.6-A resolution) showed that the basic structure of the protein was unaltered. The loss of chemotaxis and transport functions in this and similar mutant proteins must therefore be caused by relatively simple surface effects, which include a change in local main chain conformation. The loss of chemotaxis and transport functions resulting from the introduction of an alanine residue at position 134 was suppressed by an additional isoleucine to threonine mutation at residue 132. An x-ray structure of the I132T/G134A double mutant protein (2.2-A resolution) showed that the changes in local structure were accompanied by a diffuse pattern of structural changes in the surrounding region, implying that the suppression derives from a combination of sources.
15784618	Probing the mechanism of ligand recognition in family 29 carbohydrate-binding modules.	The recycling of photosynthetically fixed carbon, by the action of microbial plant cell wall hydrolases, is integral to one of the major geochemical cycles and is of considerable industrial importance. Non-catalytic carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs) play a key role in this degradative process by targeting hydrolytic enzymes to their cognate substrate within the complex milieu of polysaccharides that comprise the plant cell wall. Family 29 CBMs have, thus far, only been found in an extracellular multienzyme plant cell wall-degrading complex from the anaerobic fungus Piromyces equi, where they exist as a CBM29-1:CBM29-2 tandem. Here we present both the structure of the CBM29-1 partner, at 1.5 A resolution, and examine the importance of hydrophobic stacking interactions as well as direct and solvent-mediated hydrogen bonds in the binding of CBM29-2 to different polysaccharides. CBM29 domains display unusual binding properties, exhibiting specificity for both beta-manno- and beta-gluco-configured ligands such as mannan, cellulose, and glucomannan. Mutagenesis reveals that "stacking" of tryptophan residues in the n and n+2 subsites plays a critical role in ligand binding, whereas the loss of tyrosine-mediated stacking in the n+4 subsite reduces, but does not abrogate, polysaccharide recognition. Direct hydrogen bonds to ligand, such as those provided by Arg-112 and Glu-78, play a pivotal role in the interaction with both mannan and cellulose, whereas removal of water-mediated interactions has comparatively little effect on carbohydrate binding. The interactions of CBM29-2 with the O2 of glucose or mannose contribute little to binding affinity, explaining why this CBM displays dual gluco/manno specificity.
9514636	Involvement of glutamic acid residue at position 7 in the formation of the intramolecular disulfide bond of Escherichia coli heat-stable enterotoxin Ip in vivo.	Escherichia coli heat-stable enterotoxin Ip (STIp) is a small peptide toxin composed of 18 amino acid residues containing three intramolecular disulfide bonds. We found previously that the bonds are formed by the catalysis of DsbA (a oxidoreductase) in periplasm [1]. To interact with DsbA, the STIp in periplasm must have a structure suitable as substrate. However, the amino acid residues contributing to the construction of this structure have not been elucidated. We mutated the codon for the glutamic acid at position 7 of STIp by oligonucleotide site-specific mutagenesis in vivo and analysed the STIp produced from the mutant gene. The intramolecular disulfide bonds were not formed in mutant STIp (Glu-7-->Ala), but were formed in mutant STIp (Glu-7-->Asp). Furthermore, we found that replacing the asparagine residue at position 11 and the proline residue at position 12 did not affect the disulfide bond formation of STIp. The results indicate that a negative charge at position 7 in the sequence of STIp is necessary for STIp to interact with DsbA in periplasm.
12208978	Crystal structures of Zidovudine- or Lamivudine-resistant human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptases containing mutations at codons 41, 184, and 215.	Six structures of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT) containing combinations of resistance mutations for zidovudine (AZT) (M41L and T215Y) or lamivudine (M184V) have been determined as inhibitor complexes. Minimal conformational changes in the polymerase or nonnucleoside RT inhibitor sites compared to the mutant RTMC (D67N, K70R, T215F, and K219N) are observed, indicating that such changes may occur only with certain combinations of mutations. Model building M41L and T215Y into HIV-1 RT-DNA and docking in ATP that is utilized in the pyrophosphorolysis reaction for AZT resistance indicates that some conformational rearrangement appears necessary in RT for ATP to interact simultaneously with the M41L and T215Y mutations.
15299734	Structural refinement of the DNA-containing capsid of canine parvovirus using RSRef, a resolution-dependent stereochemically restrained real-space refinement method.	The canine parvovirus structure (CPV) [Tsao, Chapman, Agbandje, Keller, Smith, Wu, Luo, Smith, Rossmann, Compans & Parrish (1991). Science, 251, 1456-1464] has been refined by a real-space refinement procedure [Chapman (1994). Acta Cryst. A51, 69-801. The fit of an atomic model to electron density was optimized while taking into account the resolution limit of the data and the stereochemistry of the structure. The refined model had a reasonable free R factor [Brtinger (1992). Nature (London), 355, 472-4751 of 0.29. The method is particularly fast and convenient when only a small fraction of the crystallographic asymmetric unit needs to be refined, as is the case when there is high non-crystallographic redundancy. Cycles of refinement for virus capsids were completed in about 1/50th of the time required for equivalent reciprocal-space procedures.
7754395	The crystal structure of urease from Klebsiella aerogenes.	The crystal structure of urease from Klebsiella aerogenes has been determined at 2.2 A resolution and refined to an R factor of 18.2 percent. The enzyme contains four structural domains: three with novel folds playing structural roles, and an (alpha beta)8 barrel domain, which contains the bi-nickel center. The two active site nickels are 3.5 A apart. One nickel ion is coordinated by three ligands (with low occupancy of a fourth ligand) and the second is coordinated by five ligands. A carbamylated lysine provides an oxygen ligand to each nickel, explaining why carbon dioxide is required for the activation of urease apoenzyme. The structure is compatible with a catalytic mechanism whereby urea ligates Ni-1 to complete its tetrahedral coordination and a hydroxide ligand of Ni-2 attacks the carbonyl carbon. A surprisingly high structural similarity between the urease catalytic domain and that of the zinc-dependent adenosine deaminase reveals a remarkable example of active site divergence.
14581558	Structures of host range-controlling regions of the capsids of canine and feline parvoviruses and mutants.	Canine parvovirus (CPV) and feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) differ in their ability to infect dogs and dog cells. Canine cell infection is a specific property of CPV and depends on the ability of the virus to bind the canine transferrin receptor (TfR), as well as other unidentified factors. Three regions in the capsid structure, located around VP2 residues 93, 300, and 323, can all influence canine TfR binding and canine cell infection. These regions were compared in the CPV and FPV capsid structures that have been determined, as well as in two new structures of CPV capsids that contain substitutions of the VP2 Asn-93 to Asp and Arg, respectively. The new structures, determined by X-ray crystallography to 3.2 and 3.3 A resolutions, respectively, clearly showed differences in the interactions of residue 93 with an adjacent loop on the capsid surface. Each of the three regions show small differences in structure, but each appears to be structurally independent of the others, and the changes likely act together to affect the ability of the capsid to bind the canine TfR and to infect canine cells. This emphasizes the complex nature of capsid alterations that change the virus-cell interaction to allow infection of cells from different hosts.
12627952	The 1.75 A crystal structure of acetyl-CoA synthetase bound to adenosine-5'-propylphosphate and coenzyme A.	Acetyl-coenzyme A synthetase catalyzes the two-step synthesis of acetyl-CoA from acetate, ATP, and CoA and belongs to a family of adenylate-forming enzymes that generate an acyl-AMP intermediate. This family includes other acyl- and aryl-CoA synthetases, firefly luciferase, and the adenylation domains of the modular nonribosomal peptide synthetases. We have determined the X-ray crystal structure of acetyl-CoA synthetase complexed with adenosine-5'-propylphosphate and CoA. The structure identifies the CoA binding pocket as well as a new conformation for members of this enzyme family in which the approximately 110-residue C-terminal domain exhibits a large rotation compared to structures of peptide synthetase adenylation domains. This domain movement presents a new set of residues to the active site and removes a conserved lysine residue that was previously shown to be important for catalysis of the adenylation half-reaction. Comparison of our structure with kinetic and structural data of closely related enzymes suggests that the members of the adenylate-forming family of enzymes may adopt two different orientations to catalyze the two half-reactions. Additionally, we provide a structural explanation for the recently shown control of enzyme activity by acetylation of an active site lysine.
11112523	Estimation of the hydrophobic effect in an antigen-antibody protein-protein interface.	Antigen-antibody complexes provide useful models for analyzing the thermodynamics of protein-protein association reactions. We have employed site-directed mutagenesis, X-ray crystallography, and isothermal titration calorimetry to investigate the role of hydrophobic interactions in stabilizing the complex between the Fv fragment of the anti-hen egg white lysozyme (HEL) antibody D1.3 and HEL. Crystal structures of six FvD1.3-HEL mutant complexes in which an interface tryptophan residue (V(L)W92) has been replaced by residues with smaller side chains (alanine, serine, valine, aspartate, histidine, and phenylalanine) were determined to resolutions between 1.75 and 2.00 A. In the wild-type complex, V(L)W92 occupies a large hydrophobic pocket on the surface of HEL and constitutes an energetic "hot spot" for antigen binding. The losses in apolar buried surface area in the mutant complexes, relative to wild-type, range from 25 (V(L)F92) to 115 A(2) (V(L)A92), with no significant shifts in the positions of protein atoms at the mutation site for any of the complexes except V(L)A92, where there is a peptide flip. The affinities of the mutant Fv fragments for HEL are 10-100-fold lower than that of the original antibody. Formation of all six mutant complexes is marked by a decrease in binding enthalpy that exceeds the decrease in binding free energy, such that the loss in enthalpy is partly offset by a compensating gain in entropy. No correlation was observed between decreases in apolar, polar, or aggregate (sum of the apolar and polar) buried surface area in the V(L)92 mutant series and changes in the enthalpy of formation. Conversely, there exist linear correlations between losses of apolar buried surface and decreases in binding free energy (R(2) = 0.937) as well as increases in the solvent portion of the entropy of binding (R(2) = 0.909). The correlation between binding free energy and apolar buried surface area corresponds to 21 cal mol(-1) A(-2) (1 cal = 4.185 J) for the effective hydrophobicity at the V(L)92 mutation site. Furthermore, the slope of the line defined by the correlation between changes in binding free energy and solvent entropy approaches unity, demonstrating that the exclusion of solvent from the binding interface is the predominant energetic factor in the formation of this protein complex. Our estimate of the hydrophobic contribution to binding at site V(L)92 in the D1.3-HEL interface is consistent with values for the hydrophobic effect derived from classical hydrocarbon solubility models. We also show how residue V(L)W92 can contribute significantly less to stabilization when buried in a more polar pocket, illustrating the dependence of the hydrophobic effect on local environment at different sites in a protein-protein interface.
12065400	Plasticity in protein-DNA recognition: lac repressor interacts with its natural operator 01 through alternative conformations of its DNA-binding domain.	The lac repressor-operator system is a model system for understanding protein-DNA interactions and allosteric mechanisms in gene regulation. Despite the wealth of biochemical data provided by extensive mutations of both repressor and operator, the specific recognition mechanism of the natural lac operators by lac repressor has remained elusive. Here we present the first high-resolution structure of a dimer of the DNA-binding domain of lac repressor bound to its natural operator 01. The global positioning of the dimer on the operator is dramatically asymmetric, which results in a different pattern of specific contacts between the two sites. Specific recognition is accomplished by a combination of elongation and twist by 48 degrees of the right lac subunit relative to the left one, significant rearrangement of many side chains as well as sequence-dependent deformability of the DNA. The set of recognition mechanisms involved in the lac repressor-operator system is unique among other protein-DNA complexes and presents a nice example of the adaptability that both proteins and DNA exhibit in the context of their mutual interaction.
15865427	Role of the intramolecular hydrogen bond network in the inhibitory power of chymotrypsin inhibitor 2.	A series of mutants of chymotrypsin inhibitor 2 (CI2), at residues involved in intramolecular interactions that shape and constrain the binding loop, were studied to determine their relative importance for inhibition of the serine protease subtilisin BPN', and for resistance of the inhibitor to proteolysis. These functional properties were investigated in tandem with the crystal structures of the mutant inhibitor-enzyme complexes. A dense hydrogen bonding network that supports the binding loop in the vicinity of the scissile bond was found to be important both for enzyme affinity and for stability to proteolysis. Structural analysis, in combination with biochemical measurements, allows differentiation of the structural components most important for resistance to proteolysis and/or binding. The most critical participating residues in the network were found to be Thr-58, Glu-60, Arg-65, and Gly-83. Glu-60 is more important for resistance to proteolysis than for binding, while Arg-65 and two other Arg residues play a greater role in binding than in resistance to proteolysis. Structural comparisons reveal a wide variety of subtle conformational changes in response to mutation, with built-in robustness in the hydrogen bond network, such that loss of one contact is compensated by other new contacts.
16008571	Structural basis for the changed substrate specificity of Drosophila melanogaster deoxyribonucleoside kinase mutant N64D.	The Drosophila melanogaster deoxyribonucleoside kinase (Dm-dNK) double mutant N45D/N64D was identified during a previous directed evolution study. This mutant enzyme had a decreased activity towards the natural substrates and decreased feedback inhibition with dTTP, whereas the activity with 3'-modified nucleoside analogs like 3'-azidothymidine (AZT) was nearly unchanged. Here, we identify the mutation N64D as being responsible for these changes. Furthermore, we crystallized the mutant enzyme in the presence of one of its substrates, thymidine, and the feedback inhibitor, dTTP. The introduction of the charged Asp residue appears to destabilize the LID region (residues 167-176) of the enzyme by electrostatic repulsion and no hydrogen bond to the 3'-OH is made in the substrate complex by Glu172 of the LID region. This provides a binding space for more bulky 3'-substituents like the azido group in AZT but influences negatively the interactions between Dm-dNK, substrates and feedback inhibitors based on deoxyribose. The detailed picture of the structure-function relationship provides an improved background for future development of novel mutant suicide genes for Dm-dNK-mediated gene therapy.
8114095	Crystal structure of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase refined at 2 A resolution. Implications for a large conformational change during catalysis.	The crystal structures of three forms of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase have been refined: the oxidized form of the wild-type enzyme at 2.1 A resolution, a variant containing a cysteine to serine mutation at the active site (Cys138Ser) at 2.0 A resolution, and a complex of this variant with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+) at 2.3 A resolution. The enzyme mechanism involves the transfer of reducing equivalents from reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) to a disulfide bond in the enzyme, via a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Thioredoxin reductase contains FAD and NADPH binding domains that are structurally similar to the corresponding domains of the related enzyme glutathione reductase. The relative orientation of these domains is, however, very different in the two enzymes: when the FAD domains of thioredoxin and glutathione reductases are superimposed, the NADPH domain of one is rotated by 66 degrees with respect to the other. The observed binding mode of NADP+ in thioredoxin reductase is non-productive in that the nicotinamide ring is more than 17 A from the flavin ring system. While in glutathione reductase the redox active disulfide is located in the FAD domain, in thioredoxin reductase it is in the NADPH domain and is part of a four-residue sequence (Cys-Ala-Thr-Cys) that is close in structure to the corresponding region of thioredoxin (Cys-Gly-Pro-Cys), with a root-mean-square deviation of 0.22 A for atoms in the disulfide bonded ring. There are no significant conformational differences between the structure of the wild-type enzyme and that of the Cys138Ser mutant, except that a disulfide bond is not present in the latter. The disulfide bond is positioned productively in this conformation of the enzyme, i.e. it stacks against the flavin ring system in a position that would facilitate its reduction by the flavin. However, the cysteine residues are relatively inaccessible for interaction with the substrate, thioredoxin. These results suggest that thioredoxin reductase must undergo conformational changes during enzyme catalysis. All three structures reported here are for the same conformation of the enzyme and no direct evidence is available as yet for such conformational changes. The simplest possibility is that the NADPH domain rotates between the conformation observed here and an orientation similar to that seen in glutathione reductase. This would alternately place the nicotinamide ring and the disulfide bond near the flavin ring, and expose the cysteine residues for reaction with thioredoxin in the hypothetical conformation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
11772019	Probing the role of the chloride ion in the mechanism of human pancreatic alpha-amylase.	Human pancreatic alpha-amylase (HPA) is a member of the alpha-amylase family involved in the degradation of starch. Some members of this family, including HPA, require chloride for maximal activity. To determine the mechanism of chloride activation, a series of mutants (R195A, R195Q, N298S, R337A, and R337Q) were made in which residues in the chloride ion binding site were replaced. Mutations in this binding site were found to severely affect the ability of HPA to bind chloride ions with no binding detected for the R195 and R337 mutant enzymes. X-ray crystallographic analysis revealed that these mutations did not result in significant structural changes. However, the introduction of these mutations did alter the kinetic properties of the enzyme. Mutations to residue R195 resulted in a 20-450-fold decrease in the activity of the enzyme toward starch and shifted the pH optimum to a more basic pH. Interestingly, replacement of R337 with a nonbasic amino acid resulted in an alpha-amylase that no longer required chloride for catalysis and has a pH profile similar to that of wild-type HPA. In contrast, a mutation at residue N298 resulted in an enzyme that had much lower binding affinity for chloride but still required chloride for maximal activity. We propose that the chloride is required to increase the pK(a) of the acid/base catalyst, E233, which would otherwise be lower due to the presence of R337, a positively charged residue.
3398051	Crystallization of haloalkane dehalogenase from Xanthobacter autotrophicus GJ10.	Haloalkane dehalogenases are enzymes that release chloride or bromide from n-halogenated alkanes. X-ray quality crystals of haloalkane dehalogenase from the 1,2-dichloroethane-degrading bacterium Xanthobacter autotrophicus GJ10 have been grown at room temperature from 64% saturated ammonium sulfate solutions (pH 6.2 to 6.4). The crystals diffract in the X-ray beam to at least 2.4 A resolution (1 A = 0.1 nm). Their space group is P2(1)2(1)2, with cell dimensions a = 94.1 A, b = 72.8 A, c = 41.4 A and alpha = beta = gamma = 90 degrees. There is one monomer (molecular weight 36,000) per asymmetric unit.
7175934	FAD-binding site of glutathione reductase.	null
10545127	Structure and function of an archaeal topoisomerase VI subunit with homology to the meiotic recombination factor Spo11.	In all organisms, type II DNA topoisomerases are essential for untangling chromosomal DNA. We have determined the structure of the DNA-binding core of the Methanococcus jannaschii DNA topoisomerase VI A subunit at 2.0 A resolution. The overall structure of this subunit is unique, demonstrating that archaeal type II enzymes are distinct from other type II topoisomerases. However, the core structure contains a pair of domains that are also found in type IA and classic type II topoisomerases. Together, these regions may form the basis of a DNA cleavage mechanism shared among these enzymes. The core A subunit is a dimer that contains a deep groove that spans both protomers. The dimer architecture suggests that DNA is bound in the groove, across the A subunit interface, and that the two monomers separate during DNA transport. The A subunit of topoisomerase VI is homologous to the meiotic recombination factor, Spo11, and this structure can serve as a template for probing Spo11 function in eukaryotes.
15209499	Nickel superoxide dismutase structure and mechanism.	The 1.30 A resolution crystal structure of nickel superoxide dismutase (NiSOD) identifies a novel SOD fold, assembly, and Ni active site. NiSOD is a hexameric assembly of right-handed 4-helix bundles of up-down-up-down topology with N-terminal hooks chelating the active site Ni ions. This newly identified nine-residue Ni-hook structural motif (His-Cys-X-X-Pro-Cys-Gly-X-Tyr) provides almost all interactions critical for metal binding and catalysis, and thus will likely be diagnostic of NiSODs. Conserved lysine residues are positioned for electrostatic guidance of the superoxide anion to the narrow active site channel. Apo structures show that the Ni-hook motif is unfolded prior to metal binding. The active site Ni geometry cycles from square planar Ni(II), with thiolate (Cys2 and Cys6) and backbone nitrogen (His1 and Cys2) ligands, to square pyramidal Ni(III) with an added axial His1 side chain ligand, consistent with electron paramagentic resonance spectroscopy. Analyses of the three NiSOD structures and comparisons to the Cu,Zn and Mn/Fe SODs support specific molecular mechanisms for NiSOD maturation and catalysis, and identify important structure-function relationships conserved among SODs.
12098779	Synthesis and oxidative refolding of hainantoxin-IV.	Hainantoxin-IV, a neutoxic peptide from the spider Selenocosimia hainana, was synthesized by solid-phase method with fluorenylmethyoxycarbonyl amino acids (Fmoc-AA). Reverse-phase HPLC was used to monitor the oxidative folding of synthetic Hainantoxin-IV under different reaction conditions in order to find optimal conditions for renaturation of synthetic Hainantoxin-IV. The best renaturation yield was received in 5 mmol/L GSH and 0.5 mmol/L GSSG at pH 8.0 in 0.1 mol/L Tris-HCl and 0.1 mol/L NaCl buffer. The renaturated Hainantoxin-IV was monitored with MALDI-TOF MS  reverse-phase HPLC and isolated mouse phrenic nerve-diaphragm preparation.
15159559	Short hydrogen bonds in photoactive yellow protein.	Eight high-resolution crystal structures of the ground state of photoactive yellow protein (PYP) solved under a variety of conditions reveal that its chromophore is stabilized by two unusually short hydrogen bonds. Both Tyr42 Oeta and Glu46 Oepsilon are separated from the chromophore phenolate oxygen by less than the sum of their atomic van der Waals radii, 2.6 angstroms. This is characteristic of strong hydrogen bonding, in which hydrogen bonds acquire significant covalent character. The hydrogen bond from the protonated Glu46 to the negatively charged phenolate oxygen is 2.58 +/- 0.01 angstroms in length, while that from Tyr42 is considerably shorter, 2.49 +/- 0.01 angstroms. The E46Q mutant was solved to 0.95 angstroms resolution; the isosteric mutation increased the length of the hydrogen bond from Glx46 to the chromophore by 0.29 +/- 0.01 angstroms to that of an average hydrogen bond, 2.88 +/- 0.01 angstroms. The very short hydrogen bond from Tyr42 explains why mutating this residue has such a severe effect on the ground-state structure and PYP photocycle. The effect of isosteric mutations on the photocycle can be largely explained by the alterations to the length and strength of these hydrogen bonds.
14512736	Solution structure of the hypothetical protein YqgF from Escherichia coli reveals an RNAse H fold.	null
12732650	Lactococcus lactis dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A mutants reveal important facets of the enzymatic function.	Dihydroorotate dehydrogenases (DHODs) are flavoenzymes catalyzing the oxidation of (S)-dihydroorotate to orotate in the biosynthesis of UMP, the precursor of all other pyrimidine nucleotides. On the basis of sequence, DHODs can be divided into two classes, class 1, further divided in subclasses 1A and 1B, and class 2. This division corresponds to differences in cellular location and the nature of the electron acceptor. Herein we report a study of Lactococcus lactis DHODA, a representative of the class 1A enzymes. Based on the DHODA structure we selected seven residues that are highly conserved between both main classes of DHODs as well as three residues representing surface charges close to the active site for site-directed mutagenesis. The availability of both kinetic and structural data on the mutant enzymes allowed us to define the roles individual structural segments play in catalysis. We have also structurally proven the presence of an open active site loop in DHODA and obtained information about the interactions that control movements of loops around the active site. Furthermore, in one mutant structure we observed differences between the two monomers of the dimer, confirming an apparent asymmetry between the two substrate binding sites that was indicated by the kinetic results.
14661963	Infrared spectroscopic and mutational studies on putidaredoxin-induced conformational changes in ferrous CO-P450cam.	Ferrous-carbon monoxide bound form of cytochrome P450cam (CO-P450cam) has two infrared (IR) CO stretching bands at 1940 and 1932 cm(-1). The former band is dominant (>95% in area) for CO-P450cam free of putidaredoxin (Pdx), while the latter band is dominant (>95% in area) in the complex of CO-P450cam with reduced Pdx. The binding of Pdx to CO-P450cam thus evokes a conformational change in the heme active site. To study the mechanism involved in the conformational change, surface amino acid residues Arg79, Arg109, and Arg112 in P450cam were replaced with Lys, Gln, and Met. IR spectroscopic and kinetic analyses of the mutants revealed that an enzyme that has a larger 1932 cm(-1) band area upon Pdx-binding has a larger catalytic activity. Examination of the crystal structures of R109K and R112K suggested that the interaction between the guanidium group of Arg112 and Pdx is important for the conformational change. The mutations did not change a coupling ratio between the hydroxylation product and oxygen consumed. We interpret these findings to mean that the interaction of P450cam with Pdx through Arg112 enhances electron donation from the proximal ligand (Cys357) to the O-O bond of iron-bound O(2) and, possibly, promotes electron transfer from reduced Pdx to oxyP450cam, thereby facilitating the O-O bond splitting.
387599	Purification and partial characterization of heat-stable enterotoxin of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.	Heat-stable enterotoxin was purified from a strain of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli 53402 A-1 from human intestine. The cells were cultured in Casamino Acids-yeast extract-salts medium, and the purification procedure consisted of protamine sulfate treatment of the culture supernatant, ultrafiltration with an Amicon PM-10 membrane, diethylaminoethyl-cellulose column chromatography, hydroxyapatite column chromatography, Bio-Gel P-10 gel filtration, 90% ethanol extraction, and preparative polyacrylamide gel disc electrophoresis. About 300-fold purification was achieved, with a yield of about 12%. However, the homogeneity of the purified heat-stable enterotoxin was not rigorously demonstrated. The purified heat-stable enterotoxin had an absorption maximum at about 275 nm, and its isoelectric point was about 3.90. The molecular weight of the purified heat-stable enterotoxin was ca. 4,000 by Sephadex G-100 gel filtration. The minimum effective dose of purified heat-stable enterotoxin was about 2.5 ng in the suckling mouse assay. The purified heat-stable enterotoxin gave a positive reaction in not only the suckling mouse assay but also the mouse intestinal loop test and the guinea pig skin permeability test.
15003452	Crystal structures of the catalytic domain of phosphodiesterase 4B complexed with AMP, 8-Br-AMP, and rolipram.	Phosphodiesterase catalyzes the hydrolysis of the intracellular second messenger 3',5'-cyclic AMP (cAMP) into the corresponding 5'-nucleotide. Phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4), the major cAMP-specific PDE in inflammatory and immune cells, is an attractive target for the treatment of asthma and COPD. We have determined crystal structures of the catalytic domain of PDE4B complexed with AMP (2.0 A), 8-Br-AMP (2.13 A) and the potent inhibitor rolipram (2.0 A). All the ligands bind in the same hydrophobic pocket and can interact directly with the active site metal ions. The identity of these metal ions was examined using X-ray anomalous difference data. The structure of the AMP complex confirms the location of the catalytic site and allowed us to speculate about the detailed mechanism of catalysis. The high-resolution structures provided the experimental insight into the nucleotide selectivity of phosphodiesterase. 8-Br-AMP binds in the syn conformation to the enzyme and demonstrates an alternative nucleotide-binding mode. Rolipram occupies much of the AMP-binding site and forms two hydrogen bonds with Gln443 similar to the nucleotides.
2059620	Redox enzyme engineering: conversion of human glutathione reductase into a trypanothione reductase.	The substrate specificity of the human enzyme glutathione reductase was changed from its natural substrate glutathione to trypanothione [N1,N8-bis(glutathionyl)spermidine] by site-directed mutagenesis of two residues. The glutathione analogue, trypanothione, is the natural substrate for trypanothione reductase, an enzyme found in trypanosomatids and leishmanias, the causative agents of diseases such as African sleeping sickness, Chagas disease, and Oriental sore. The rational bases for our mutational experiments were the availability of a high-resolution X-ray structure for human glutathione reductase with bound substrates, the active site sequence comparisons of human glutathione reductase and the trypanothione reductases from Trypanosoma congolense and Trypanosoma cruzi, a complementary set of mutants in T. congolense trypanothione reductase, and the properties of substrate analogues of trypanothione. Mutation of two residues, A34----E34 and R37----W37, in the glutathione-binding site of human glutathione reductase switches human glutathione reductase into a trypanothione reductase with a preference for trypanothione over glutathione by a factor of 700 using kcat/Km as a criterion.
10947986	Twists in catalysis: alternating conformations of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase.	In thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) from Escherichia coli, cycles of reduction and reoxidation of the flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactor depend on rate-limiting rearrangements of the FAD and NADPH (reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) domains. We describe the structure of the flavin-reducing conformation of E. coli TrxR at a resolution of 3.0 angstroms. The orientation of the two domains permits reduction of FAD by NADPH and oxidation of the enzyme dithiol by the protein substrate, thioredoxin. The alternate conformation, described by Kuriyan and co-workers, permits internal transfer of reducing equivalents from reduced FAD to the active-site disulfide. Comparison of these structures demonstrates that switching between the two conformations involves a "ball-and-socket" motion in which the pyridine nucleotide-binding domain rotates by 67 degrees.
16167343	Crystal structure of Hsp33 chaperone (TM1394) from Thermotoga maritima at 2.20 A resolution.	
11470436	Crystal structures of mitochondrial processing peptidase reveal the mode for specific cleavage of import signal sequences.	BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP) is a metalloendopeptidase that cleaves the N-terminal signal sequences of nuclear-encoded proteins targeted for transport from the cytosol to the mitochondria. Mitochondrial signal sequences vary in length and sequence, but each is cleaved at a single specific site by MPP. The cleavage sites typically contain an arginine at position -2 (in the N-terminal portion) from the scissile peptide bond in addition to other distal basic residues, and an aromatic residue at position +1. Mitochondrial import machinery recognizes amphiphilic helical conformations in signal sequences. However, it is unclear how MPP specifically recognizes diverse presequence substrates. RESULTS: The crystal structures of recombinant yeast MPP and a cleavage-deficient mutant of MPP complexed with synthetic signal peptides have been determined. MPP is a heterodimer; its alpha and beta subunits are homologous to the core II and core I proteins, respectively, of the ubiquinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase complex. Crystal structures of two different synthetic substrate peptides cocrystallized with the mutant MPP each show the peptide bound in an extended conformation at the active site. Recognition sites for the arginine at position -2 and the +1 aromatic residue are observed. CONCLUSIONS: MPP bound two mitochondrial import presequence peptides in extended conformations in a large polar cavity. The presequence conformations differ from the amphiphilic helical conformation recognized by mitochondrial import components. Our findings suggest that the presequences adopt context-dependent conformations through mitochondrial import and processing, helical for recognition by mitochondrial import machinery and extended for cleavage by the main processing component.
8955188	Assembly, specific binding, and crystallization of a human TCR-alphabeta with an antigenic Tax peptide from human T lymphotropic virus type 1 and the class I MHC molecule HLA-A2.	T lymphocytes use TCR-alphabeta to bind and to recognize complexes of antigenic peptides bound to MHC proteins located at the surface of APCs. We have assembled and crystallized this intercellular complex of TCR/peptide/MHC from soluble human TCR-alphabeta and soluble peptide/HLA-A2 complexes. The soluble TCR-alphabeta binds specifically to its in vivo ligand, the complex of HLA-A2, and a peptide from the Tax protein of human T lymphotropic virus type 1. The soluble TCR also binds in vitro to an altered peptide ligand, which appears to be a partial agonist in T cell assays as determined by its ability to elicit different cytolytic and lymphokine secretion responses. Heterodimerization and the antigenic specificity of the TCR do not require its interchain disulfide bond, transmembrane segments, or glycosylations. Crystals of the TCR/peptide/HLA-A2 complex diffract x-rays, providing the means to study in atomic detail the mechanism of Ag-specific cell-cell recognition between T cells and target cells.
2716847	Structural plasticity broadens the specificity of an engineered protease.	The substrate specificity of alpha-lytic protease has been changed dramatically, with a concomitant increase in activity, by replacing an active-site Met with Ala. The substrate specificity of both this mutant and another similar mutant are extraordinarily broad. X-ray crystallographic analysis shows that structural plasticity, a combination of alternate side-chain conformations and binding-site flexibility, allows both large and small substrates to be well accommodated.
12861225	Crystal structure of human cytochrome P450 2C9 with bound warfarin.	Cytochrome P450 proteins (CYP450s) are membrane-associated haem proteins that metabolize physiologically important compounds in many species of microorganisms, plants and animals. Mammalian CYP450s recognize and metabolize diverse xenobiotics such as drug molecules, environmental compounds and pollutants. Human CYP450 proteins CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 are the major drug-metabolizing isoforms, and contribute to the oxidative metabolism of more than 90% of the drugs in current clinical use. Polymorphic variants have also been reported for some CYP450 isoforms, which has implications for the efficacy of drugs in individuals, and for the co-administration of drugs. The molecular basis of drug recognition by human CYP450s, however, has remained elusive. Here we describe the crystal structure of a human CYP450, CYP2C9, both unliganded and in complex with the anti-coagulant drug warfarin. The structure defines unanticipated interactions between CYP2C9 and warfarin, and reveals a new binding pocket. The binding mode of warfarin suggests that CYP2C9 may undergo an allosteric mechanism during its function. The newly discovered binding pocket also suggests that CYP2C9 may simultaneously accommodate multiple ligands during its biological function, and provides a possible molecular basis for understanding complex drug-drug interactions.
9514271	The response of T4 lysozyme to large-to-small substitutions within the core and its relation to the hydrophobic effect.	To further examine the structural and thermodynamic basis of hydrophobic stabilization in proteins, all of the bulky non-polar residues that are buried or largely buried within the core of T4 lysozyme were substituted with alanine. In 25 cases, including eight reported previously, it was possible to determine the crystal structures of the variants. The structures of four variants with double substitutions were also determined. In the majority of cases the "large-to-small" substitutions lead to internal cavities. In other cases declivities or channels open to the surface were formed. In some cases the structural changes were minimal (mainchain shifts < or = 0.3 A); in other cases mainchain atoms moved up to 2 A. In the case of Ile 29 --> Ala the structure collapsed to such a degree that the volume of the putative cavity was zero. Crystallographic analysis suggests that the occupancy of the engineered cavities by solvent is usually low. The mutants Val 149 --> Ala (V149A) and Met 6 --> Ala (M6A), however, are exceptions and have, respectively, one and two well-ordered water molecules within the cavity. The Val 149 --> Ala substitution allows the solvent molecule to hydrogen bond to polar atoms that are occluded in the wild-type molecule. Similarly, the replacement of Met 6 with alanine allows the two solvent molecules to hydrogen bond to each other and to polar atoms on the protein. Except for Val 149 --> Ala the loss of stability of all the cavity mutants can be rationalized as a combination of two terms. The first is a constant for a given class of substitution (e.g., -2.1 kcal/mol for all Leu --> Ala substitutions) and can be considered as the difference between the free energy of transfer of leucine and alanine from solvent to the core of the protein. The second term can be considered as the energy cost of forming the cavity and is consistent with a numerical value of 22 cal mol(-1) A(-3). Physically, this term is due to the loss of van der Waal's interactions between the bulky sidechain that is removed and the atoms that form the wall of the cavity. The overall results are consistent with the prior rationalization of Leu --> Ala mutants in T4 lysozyme by Eriksson et al. (Eriksson et al., 1992, Science 255:178-183).
16168436	Crystal structures of active SRC kinase domain complexes.	c-Src was the first proto-oncoprotein to be identified, and has become the focus of many drug discovery programs. Src structures of a major inactive form have shown how the protein kinase is rigidified by several interdomain interactions; active configurations of Src are generated by release from this "assembled" or "bundled" form. Despite the importance of Src as a drug target, there is relatively little structural information available regarding the presumably more flexible active forms. Here we report three crystal structures of a dimeric active c-Src kinase domain, in an apo and two ligand complexed forms, with resolutions ranging from 2.9A to 1.95A. The structures show how the kinase domain, in the absence of the rigidifying interdomain interactions of the inactivation state, adopts a more open and flexible conformation. The ATP site inhibitor CGP77675 binds to the protein kinase with canonical hinge hydrogen bonds and also to the c-Src specific threonine 340. In contrast to purvalanol B binding in CDK2, purvalanol A binds in c-Src with a conformational change in a more open ATP pocket.
12065398	Structural basis for the interaction between NTF2 and nucleoporin FxFG repeats.	Interactions with nucleoporins containing FxFG-repeat cores are crucial for the nuclear import of RanGDP mediated by nuclear transport factor 2 (NTF2). We describe here the 1.9 A resolution crystal structure of yeast NTF2-N77Y bound to a FxFG-nucleoporin core, which provides a basis for understanding this interaction and its role in nuclear trafficking. The two identical FxFG binding sites on the dimeric molecule are formed by residues from each chain of NTF2. Engineered mutants at the interaction interface reduce the binding of NTF2 to nuclear pores and cause reduced growth rates and Ran mislocalization when substituted for the wild-type protein in yeast. Comparison with the crystal structure of FG-nucleoporin cores bound to importin-beta and TAP/p15 identified a number of common features of their binding sites. The structure of the binding interfaces on these transport factors provides a rationale for the specificity of their interactions with nucleoporins that, combined with their weak binding constants, facilitates rapid translocation through NPCs during nuclear trafficking.
7756982	Crystal structure of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase reconstituted with the modified FAD present in alcohol oxidase from methylotrophic yeasts: evidence for an arabinoflavin.	The flavin prosthetic group (FAD) of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens was replaced by a stereochemical analog, which is spontaneously formed from natural FAD in alcohol oxidases from methylotrophic yeasts. Reconstitution of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from apoprotein and modified FAD is a rapid process complete within seconds. Crystals of the enzyme-substrate complex of modified FAD-containing p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase diffract to 2.1 A resolution. The crystal structure provides direct evidence for the presence of an arabityl sugar chain in the modified form of FAD. The isoalloxazine ring of the arabinoflavin adenine dinucleotide (a-FAD) is located in a cleft outside the active site as recently observed in several other p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase complexes. Like the native enzyme, a-FAD-containing p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase preferentially binds the phenolate form of the substrate (pKo = 7.2). The substrate acts as an effector highly stimulating the rate of enzyme reduction by NADPH (kred > 500 s-1). The oxidative part of the catalytic cycle of a-FAD-containing p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase differs from native enzyme. Partial uncoupling of hydroxylation results in the formation of about 0.3 mol of 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate and 0.7 mol of hydrogen peroxide per mol NADPH oxidized. It is proposed that flavin motion in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is important for efficient reduction and that the flavin "out" conformation is associated with the oxidase activity.
15681871	Molecular determinants of substrate specificity in the feruloyl esterase module of xylanase 10B from Clostridium thermocellum.	Feruloyl esterases play a key role in the degradation of the intricate structure of the plant cell wall by hydrolysing the ferulate ester groups involved in the cross-linking between hemicelluloses and between hemicellulose and lignin. The structure of the feruloyl esterase module of Clostridium thermocellum cellulosomal xylanase 10B has been reported previously. It displays the alpha/beta hydrolase fold with a classical Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad. Here, the structures of a Ser-Ala mutant of this feruloyl esterase in complexes with methyl syringate, methyl sinapinate and methyl vanillate are described. Substrate binding is accompanied by subtle conformational changes at amino acids Trp982, Met955, Asn1023 and Ile1019 in the ligand-binding cavity. The structural determinants, particularly the m-methoxy substituent, governing the substrate specificity of Xyn10B feruloyl esterase are rationalized.
12590921	The active site of the molybdenum cofactor biosynthetic protein domain Cnx1G.	The final step of molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in plants is catalyzed by the two-domain protein Cnx1. The G domain of Cnx1 (Cnx1G) binds molybdopterin with high affinity and transfers molybdenum to molybdopterin. Here, we describe the functional and structural characterization of structure-based Cnx1G mutants. For molybdopterin binding residues Thr542 and Ser573 were found to be important because different mutations of those residues resulted in 7- to 26-fold higher k(D) values for molybdopterin binding. Furthermore, we showed that the terminal phosphate of molybdopterin is directly involved in protein-pterin interactions as dephosphorylated molybdopterin binds with one magnitude of order lower affinity to the wild-type protein. Molybdopterin binding was not affected in mutants defective in Ser476, Asp486, or Asp515. However, molybdenum insertion was completely abolished, indicating their important role for catalysis. Based on these results we propose the binding of molybdopterin to a large depression in the structure of Cnx1G formed by beta5, alpha5, beta6, and alpha6, whereas the negatively charged depression formed by the loop between beta3 and alpha4, the N-terminal end of alpha2, the 3(10) helix, and the region between beta6 and alpha6 is involved in catalysis.
16216071	C-terminal tyrosine of ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase in hydride transfer processes with NAD(P)+/H.	Ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase (FNR) catalyzes the reduction of NADP+ to NADPH in an overall reversible reaction, showing some differences in the mechanisms between cyanobacterial and higher plant FNRs. During hydride transfer it is proposed that the FNR C-terminal Tyr is displaced by the nicotinamide. Thus, this C-terminal Tyr might be involved not only in modulating the flavin redox properties, as already shown, but also in nicotinamide binding and hydride transfer. FNR variants from the cyanobacterium Anabaena in which the C-terminal Tyr has been replaced by Trp, Phe, or Ser have been produced. All FNR variants show enhanced NADP+ and NAD+ binding, especially Tyr303Ser, which correlates with a noticeable improvement of NADH-dependent reactions. Nevertheless, the Tyr303Ser variant shows a decrease in the steady-state kcat value with NADPH. Fast kinetic analysis of the hydride transfer shows that the low efficiency observed for this mutant FNR under steady-state conditions is not due to a lack of catalytic ability but rather to the strong enzyme-coenzyme interaction. Three-dimensional structures for Tyr303Ser and Tyr303Trp variants and its complexes with NADP+ show significant differences between plant and cyanobacterial FNRs. Our results suggest that modulation of coenzyme affinity is highly influenced by the strength of the C-terminus-FAD interaction and that subtle changes between plant and cyanobacterial structures are able to modify the energy of that interaction. Additionally, it is shown that the C-terminal Tyr of FNR lowers the affinity for NADP+/H to levels compatible with steady-state turnover during the catalytic cycle, but it is not involved in the hydride transfer itself.
15207495	Regulation of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis PE/PPE genes.	The genome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis encodes approximately 170 members of the unique mycobacterial PE and PPE gene families. Evidence suggests members of these families are surface-associated cell wall proteins that may provide a diverse antigenic profile and affect immunity. To determine if the expression patterns of PE/PPE genes are consistent with a role in antigenic variability, we analyzed microarray data from 132 experimental conditions for expression of PE/PPE genes. Whole genome expression patterns show that the PE/PPE genes are regulated in a variable and largely independent manner. Gene expression profiling of 15 unique conditions identified differential regulation of 128 of the 169 PE/PPE genes. Expression of the PE/PPE genes appears to be controlled by a variety of independent mechanisms. These data indicate that differential expression of the PE/PPE genes has the potential to provide a dynamic antigenic profile during the course of changing microenvironments within the host.
1279434	Crystal structure of a Src-homology 3 (SH3) domain.	The Src-homologous SH3 domain is a small domain present in a large number of proteins that are involved in signal transduction, such as the Src protein tyrosine kinase, or in membrane-cytoskeleton interactions, but the function of SH3 is still unknown (reviewed in refs 1-3). Here we report the three-dimensional structure at 1.8 A resolution of the SH3 domain of the cytoskeletal protein spectrin expressed in Escherichia coli. The domain is a compact beta-barrel made of five antiparallel beta-strands. The amino acids that are conserved in the SH3 sequences are located close to each other on one side of the molecule. This surface is rich in aromatic and carboxylic amino acids, and is distal to the region of the molecule where the N and C termini reside and where SH3 inserts into the alpha-spectrin chain. We suggest that a protein ligand binds to this conserved surface of SH3.
3900416	Refined structure of alpha-lytic protease at 1.7 A resolution. Analysis of hydrogen bonding and solvent structure.	The structure of alpha-lytic protease, a serine protease produced by the bacterium Lysobacter enzymogenes, has been refined at 1.7 A resolution. The conventional R-factor is 0.131 for the 14,996 reflections between 8 and 1.7 A resolution with I greater than or equal to 2 sigma (I). The model consists of 1391 protein atoms, two sulfate ions and 156 water molecules. The overall root-meansquare error is estimated to be about 0.14 A. The refined structure was compared with homologous enzymes alpha-chymotrypsin and Streptomyces griseus protease A and B. A new sequence numbering was derived based on the alignment of these structures. The comparison showed that the greatest structural homology is around the active site residues Asp102, His57 and Ser195, and that basic folding pathways are maintained despite chemical changes in the hydrophobic cores. The hydrogen bonds in the structure were tabulated and the distances and angles of interaction are similar to those found in small molecules. The analysis also revealed the presence of close intraresidue interactions. There are only a few direct intermolecular hydrogen bonds. Most intermolecular interactions involve bridging solvent molecules. The structural importance of hydrogen bonds involving the side-chain of Asx residues is discussed. All the negatively charged groups have a counterion nearby, while the excess positively charged groups are exposed to the solvent. One of the sulfate ions is located near the active site, whereas the other is close to the N terminus. Of the 156 water molecules, only seven are not involved in a hydrogen bond. Six of these have polar groups nearby, while the remaining one is in very weak density. There are nine internal water molecules, consisting of two monomers, two dimers and one trimer. No significant second shell of solvent is observed.
8989327	High resolution solution structure of ribosomal protein L11-C76, a helical protein with a flexible loop that becomes structured upon binding to RNA.	The structure of the C-terminal RNA recognition domain of ribosomal protein L11 has been solved by heteronuclear three-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Although the structure can be considered high resolution in the core, 15 residues between helix alpha 1 and strand beta 1 form an extended, unstructured loop. 15N transverse relaxation measurements suggest that the loop is moving on a picosecond-to-nanosecond time scale in the free protein but not in the protein bound to RNA. Chemical shifts differences between the free protein and the bound protein suggest that the loop as well as the C-terminal end of helix alpha 3 are involved in RNA binding.
7881909	Structure of the catalytic core of the family F xylanase from Pseudomonas fluorescens and identification of the xylopentaose-binding sites.	BACKGROUND: Sequence alignment suggests that xylanases evolved from two ancestral proteins and therefore can be grouped into two families, designated F and G. Family F enzymes show no sequence similarity with any known structure and their architecture is unknown. Studies of an inactive enzyme-substrate complex will help to elucidate the structural basis of binding and catalysis in the family F xylanases. RESULTS: We have therefore determined the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of a family F enzyme, Pseudomonas fluorescens subsp. cellulosa xylanase A, at 2.5 A resolution and a crystallographic R-factor of 0.20. The structure was solved using an engineered catalytic core in which the nucleophilic glutamate was replaced by a cysteine. As expected, this yielded both high-quality mercurial derivatives and an inactive enzyme which enabled the preparation of the inactive enzyme-substrate complex in the crystal. We show that family F xylanases are eight-fold alpha/beta-barrels (TIM barrels) with two active-site glutamates, one of which is the nucleophile and the other the acid-base. Xylopentaose binds to five subsites A-E with the cleaved bond between subsites D and E. Ca2+ binding, remote from the active-site glutamates, stabilizes the structure and may be involved in the binding of extended substrates. CONCLUSIONS: The architecture of P. fluorescens subsp. cellulosa has been determined crystallographically to be a commonly occurring enzyme fold, the eight-fold alpha/beta-barrel. Xylopentaose binds across the carboxy-terminal end of the alpha/beta-barrel in an active-site cleft which contains the two catalytic glutamates.
7619796	X-ray structure of the magnesium(II)-pyrophosphate complex of the truncated head of Dictyostelium discoideum myosin to 2.7 A resolution.	The structure of the magnesium pyrophosphate complex of the truncated head of Dictyostelium myosin has been determined by molecular replacement at 2.7 A resolution and refined to a crystallographic R-factor of 16.0%. The crystals belong to the orthorhombic space group P2(1)2(1)2, where a = 105.2 A, b = 182.1 A, and c = 54.5 A. The conformation of the protein around the magnesium pyrophosphate is very similar to that seen when magnesium ADP-beryllium fluoride binds in the active site. The latter complex mimics the binding of ATP prior to hydrolysis. The pyrophosphate molecule occupies the beta- and gamma-phosphate sites, where the two phosphorus atoms are in the same positions as the beta-phosphate and the BeFx moiety of the beryllium fluoride-trapped ADP. The surrounding active site residues are almost perfectly superimposable in the two structures and the hydrogen-bonding interactions that the PPi makes with the protein are essentially identical. The similarity between the MgPPi and MgADP.BeFx complex with S1Dc suggests that the conformational change, which occurs when ATP binds to actomyosin and which reduces the affinity of myosin for actin, is caused by the binding of the gamma- and beta-phosphate groups of the nucleotide. This then implies that the role of the remainder of the substrate is to increase the binding affinity for myosin and thus to drive the equilibrium toward dissociation of myosin from actin.
15642261	A structural pathway for signaling in the E46Q mutant of photoactive yellow protein.	In the bacterial photoreceptor photoactive yellow protein (PYP), absorption of blue light by its chromophore leads to a conformational change in the protein associated with differential signaling activity, as it executes a reversible photocycle. Time-resolved Laue crystallography allows structural snapshots (as short as 150 ps) of high crystallographic resolution (approximately 1.6 A) to be taken of a protein as it functions. Here, we analyze by singular value decomposition a comprehensive time-resolved crystallographic data set of the E46Q mutant of PYP throughout the photocycle spanning 10 ns-100 ms. We identify and refine the structures of five distinct intermediates and provide a plausible chemical kinetic mechanism for their inter conversion. A clear structural progression is visible in these intermediates, in which a signal generated at the chromophore propagates through a distinct structural pathway of conserved residues and results in structural changes near the N terminus, over 20 A distant from the chromophore.
1525170	Enthalpic destabilization of a mutant human lysozyme lacking a disulfide bridge between cysteine-77 and cysteine-95.	To understand the role of disulfide bridges in protein stability, the thermodynamic changes in the denaturation of two mutant human lysozymes lacking a disulfide bridge between Cys-77 and Cys-95 (C77A and C77/95A) were analyzed using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). At pH 3.0 and 57 degrees C, the stabilities of both the C77A and C77/95A mutants were decreased about 4.6 kcal.mol-1 in Gibbs free energy change. Under the same conditions, the enthalpy changes (delta H) were 94.8 and 90.8 kcal.mol-1, respectively, which were smaller than that of the wild type (100.8 kcal.mol-1). The destabilization of the mutants was caused by enthalpic factors. Although X-ray crystallography indicated that the mutants preserve the wild-type tertiary structure, removal of the disulfide bridge increased the flexibility of the native state of the mutants. This was indicated both by an increase in the crystallographic thermal factors (B-factors) and by a decrease in the affinity of N-acetylglucosamine trimer [(NAG)3] observed using isothermal titration calorimetry (DTC) due to entropic effects. Thus, the effect of cross-linking on the stability of a protein is not solely explained by the entropy change in denaturation.
9694855	Interdomain binding of NADPH in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase as suggested by kinetic, crystallographic and modeling studies of histidine 162 and arginine 269 variants.	The conserved residues His-162 and Arg-269 of the flavoprotein p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (EC 1.14.13.2) are located at the entrance of the interdomain cleft that leads toward the active site. To study their putative role in NADPH binding, His-162 and Arg-269 were selectively changed by site-specific mutagenesis. The catalytic properties of H162R, H162Y, and R269K were similar to the wild-type enzyme. However, less conservative His-162 and Arg-269 replacements strongly impaired NADPH binding without affecting the conformation of the flavin ring and the efficiency of substrate hydroxylation. The crystal structures of H162R and R269T in complex with 4-hydroxybenzoate were solved at 3.0 and 2.0 A resolution, respectively. Both structures are virtually indistinguishable from the wild-type enzyme-substrate complex except for the substituted side chains. In contrast to wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase, H162R is not inactivated by diethyl pyrocarbonate. NADPH protects wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from diethylpyrocarbonate inactivation, suggesting that His-162 is involved in NADPH binding. Based on these results and GRID calculations we propose that the side chains of His-162 and Arg-269 interact with the pyrophosphate moiety of NADPH. An interdomain binding mode for NADPH is proposed which takes a novel sequence motif (Eppink, M. H. M., Schreuder, H. A., and van Berkel, W. J. H. (1997) Protein Sci. 6, 2454-2458) into account.
16472748	A versatile conformational switch regulates reactivity in human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase.	The dehydrogenase/decarboxylase (E1b) component of the 4 MD human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC) is a thiamin diphosphate (ThDP)-dependent enzyme. We have determined the crystal structures of E1b with ThDP bound intermediates after decarboxylation of alpha-ketoacids. We show that a key tyrosine residue in the E1b active site functions as a conformational switch to reduce the reactivity of the ThDP cofactor through interactions with its thiazolium ring. The intermediates do not assume the often-postulated enamine state, but likely a carbanion state. The carbanion presumably facilitates the second E1b-catalyzed reaction, involving the transfer of an acyl moiety from the intermediate to a lipoic acid prosthetic group in the transacylase (E2b) component of the BCKDC. The tyrosine switch further remodels an E1b loop region to promote E1b binding to E2b. Our results illustrate the versatility of the tyrosine switch in coordinating the catalytic events in E1b by modulating the reactivity of reaction intermediates.
2777802	Restrained least squares refinement of native (calcium) and cadmium-substituted carp parvalbumin using X-ray crystallographic data at 1.6-A resolution.	Carp parvalbumin coordinates calcium through one carbonyl oxygen atom and the oxygen-containing side chains of 5 amino acid residues, or 4 residues and a water molecule, in a helix-loop-helix structural motif. Other calcium-binding proteins, including calmodulin and troponin C, also possess this unique calcium-binding design, which is designated EF-hand or calmodulin fold. Parvalbumin has two such sites, labeled CD and EF. Each of the calcium-binding sites of refined structures of proteins belonging to this group has a 7-oxygen coordination sphere except those of the structure of parvalbumin as it was reported in 1975. This structure had been refined at 1.9 A using difference Fourier techniques on film data. The CD site appeared to be 6-coordinate and the EF site 8-coordinate. Results of NMR experiments using 113Cd-substituted parvalbumin, however, indicate that the sites are similar to one another with coordination number greater than 6. To resolve the inconsistency between crystallographic and NMR results, 1.6 A area detector data was collected for native and cadmium-substituted parvalbumin; the structures have been refined to R factors of 18.7% and 16.4%, respectively, with acceptable geometry and low errors in atomic coordinates. Differences between the parvalbumin structure described in 1975 and the present structure are addressed, including the discovery of 7-coordination for both the CD and EF sites.
12228249	Substrate-dependent competency of the catalytic triad of prolyl oligopeptidase.	Prolyl oligopeptidase, a serine peptidase unrelated to trypsin and subtilisin, is implicated in memory disorders and is an important target of drug design. The catalytic competence of the Asp(641) residue of the catalytic triad (Ser(554), Asp(641), His(680)) was studied using the D641N and D641A variants of the enzyme. Both variants displayed 3 orders of magnitude reduction in k(cat)/K(m) for benzyloxycarbonyl-Gly-Pro-2-naphthylamide. Using an octapeptide substrate, the decrease was 6 orders of magnitude, whereas with Z-Gly-Pro-4-nitrophenyl ester there was virtually no change in k(cat)/K(m). This indicates that the contribution of Asp(641) is very much dependent on the substrate-leaving group, which was not the case for the classic serine peptidase, trypsin. The rate constant for benzyloxycarbonyl-Gly-Pro-thiobenzylester conformed to this series as demonstrated by a method designed for monitoring the hydrolysis of thiolesters in the presence of thiol groups. Alkylation of His(680) with Z-Gly-Pro-CH(2)Cl was concluded with similar rate constants for wild-type and D641A variant. However, kinetic measurements with Z-Gly-Pro-OH, a product-like inhibitor, indicated that the His(680) is not accessible in the enzyme variants. Crystal structure determination of these mutants revealed subtle perturbations related to the catalytic activity. Many of these observations show differences in the catalysis between trypsin and prolyl oligopeptidase.
10579814	Design of MKC-442 (emivirine) analogues with improved activity against drug-resistant HIV mutants.	Two analogues of the nonnucleoside inhibitor of HIV-1 RT, MKC-442 (emivirine), containing different C6 substituents have been designed to be less susceptible to the commonly found drug-resistance mutation of Tyr181Cys. Compound TNK-6123 had a C6 thiocyclohexyl group designed to have more flexibility in adapting to the mutated drug-binding site. GCA-186 had additional 3',5'-dimethyl substituents aimed at forming close contacts with the conserved residue Trp229. Both compounds showed approximately 30-fold greater inhibitory effect than MKC-442 to the Tyr181Cys mutant virus as well as to the clinically important Lys103Asn virus. X-ray crystallographic structure determination of complexes with HIV-1 RT confirmed the predicted binding modes. These strategies might be used to improve the resilience of other NNRTI series against common drug-resistance mutations.
9253408	Trapping and visualization of a covalent enzyme-phosphate intermediate.	Using a mutant version of E. coli alkaline phosphatase, we succeeded in trapping and determining the structure of the phospho-enzyme intermediate. The X-ray structure also revealed the catalytic water molecule, bound to one of the active site zinc ions, positioned ideally for the apical attack necessary for the hydrolysis of the intermediate.
11320305	Ultrahigh-resolution structure of a BPTI mutant.	The crystal structure of a mutant of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor has been refined to 0.86 A resolution using low-temperature synchrotron data. The variant contains three mutations in the binding loop (Thr11Ala, Pro13Ala, Lys15Arg) and an unrelated Met52Leu substitution. Refinement with anisotropic displacement parameters and with removal of main-chain stereochemical restraints converged with R = 0.1035. The use of full-matrix refinement provided an estimate of the variances in the derived parameters. Some stereochemical parameters, such as the planarity of the peptide group and the value of the N-C(alpha)-C angle, show a wide spread, suggesting that the standard values used as restraints in protein structure refinements may not always be entirely appropriate. Comparison with the recently determined room-temperature structure of the same mutant at 1.42 A resolution confirms the previous observations and provides new details, such as a double conformation of the main chain at Leu29 and at Gly56-Gly57, a high proportion (over 20%) of residues in double conformations, correlation of disorder through lattice contacts and the positions of H atoms, including those in water molecules, and their involvement in C-H...O and N-H...pi hydrogen bonds.
11320302	Structures of three diphtheria toxin repressor (DtxR) variants with decreased repressor activity.	The diphtheria toxin repressor (DtxR) from Corynebacterium diphtheriae regulates the expression of the gene on corynebacteriophages that encodes diphtheria toxin (DT). Other genes regulated by DtxR include those that encode proteins involved in siderophore-mediated iron uptake. DtxR requires activation by divalent metals and holo-DtxR is a dimeric regulator with two distinct metal-binding sites per three-domain monomer. At site 1, three side chains and a sulfate or phosphate anion are involved in metal coordination. In the DtxR-DNA complex this anion is replaced by the side chain of Glu170 provided by the third domain of the repressor. At site 2 the metal ion is coordinated exclusively by constituents of the polypeptide chain. In this paper, five crystal structures of three DtxR variants focusing on residues Glu20, Arg80 and Cys102 are reported. The resolution of these structures ranges from 2.3 to 2.8 A. The side chain of Glu20 provided by the DNA-binding domain forms a salt bridge to Arg80, which in turn interacts with the anion. Replacing either of the salt-bridge partners with an alanine reduces repressor activity substantially and it has been inferred that the salt bridge could possibly control the wedge angle between the DNA-binding domain and the dimerization domain, thereby modulating repressor activity. Cys102 is a key residue of metal site 2 and its substitution into a serine abolishes repressor activity. The crystal structures of Zn-Glu20Ala-DtxR, Zn-Arg80Ala-DtxR, Cd-Cys102Ser-DtxR and apo-Cys102Ser-DtxR in two related space groups reveal that none of these substitutions leads to dramatic rearrangements of the DtxR fold. However, the five crystal structures presented here show significant local changes and a considerable degree of flexibility of the DNA-binding domain with respect to the dimerization domain. Furthermore, all five structures deviate significantly from the structure in the DtxR-DNA complex with respect to overall domain orientation. These results confirm the importance of the hinge motion for repressor activity. Since the third domain has often been invisible in previous crystal structures of DtxR, it is also noteworthy that the SH3-like domain could be traced in four of the five crystal structures.
10926489	Crystal structure of the beta-apical domain of the thermosome reveals structural plasticity in the protrusion region.	The crystal structure of the beta-apical domain of the thermosome, an archaeal group II chaperonin from Thermoplasma acidophilum, has been determined at 2.8 A resolution. The structure shows an invariant globular core from which a 25 A long protrusion emanates, composed of an elongated alpha-helix (H10) and a long extended stretch consisting of residues GluB245-ThrB253. A comparison with previous apical domain structures reveals a large segmental displacement of the protruding part of helix H10 via the hinge GluB276-ValB278. The region comprising residues GluB245-ThrB253 adopts an extended beta-like conformation rather than the alpha-helix seen in the alpha-apical domain. Consequently, it appears that the protrusions of the apical domains from group II chaperonins might assume a variety of context-dependent conformations during an open, substrate-accepting state of the chaperonin. Sequence variations in the protrusion regions that are found in the eukaryotic TRiC/CCT subunits may provide different structural propensities and hence serve different roles in substrate recognition.
12470949	Insights into substrate binding and catalytic mechanism of human tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase (Tdp1) from vanadate and tungstate-inhibited structures.	Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase (Tdp1) is a DNA repair enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of a phosphodiester bond between a tyrosine residue and a DNA 3'-phosphate. The only known example of such a linkage in eukaryotic cells occurs normally as a transient link between a type IB topoisomerase and DNA. Thus human Tdp1 is thought to be responsible for repairing lesions that occur when topoisomerase I becomes stalled on the DNA in the cell. Tdp1 has also been shown to remove glycolate from single-stranded DNA containing a 3'-phosphoglycolate, suggesting a role for Tdp1 in repair of free-radical mediated DNA double-strand breaks. We report the three-dimensional structures of human Tdp1 bound to the phosphate transition state analogs vanadate and tungstate. Each structure shows the inhibitor covalently bound to His263, confirming that this residue is the nucleophile in the first step of the catalytic reaction. Vanadate in the Tdp1-vanadate structure has a trigonal bipyramidal geometry that mimics the transition state for hydrolysis of a phosphodiester bond, while Tdp1-tungstate displays unusual octahedral coordination. The presence of low-occupancy tungstate molecules along the narrow groove of the substrate binding cleft is suggestive evidence that this groove binds ssDNA. In both cases, glycerol from the cryoprotectant solution became liganded to the vanadate or tungstate inhibitor molecules in a bidentate 1,2-diol fashion. These structural models allow predictions to be made regarding the specific binding mode of the substrate and the mechanism of catalysis.
10194345	Crystal structure determination of cholesterol oxidase from Streptomyces and structural characterization of key active site mutants.	Cholesterol oxidase is a monomeric flavoenzyme which catalyzes the oxidation and isomerization of cholesterol to cholest-4-en-3-one. The enzyme interacts with lipid bilayers in order to bind its steroid substrate. The X-ray structure of the enzyme from Brevibacterium sterolicum revealed two loops, comprising residues 78-87 and residues 433-436, which act as a lid over the active site and facilitate binding of the substrate [Vrielink et al. (1991) J. Mol. Biol. 219, 533-554; Li et al. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 11507-11515]. It was postulated that these loops must open, forming a hydrophobic channel between the membrane and the active site of the protein and thus sequestering the cholesterol substrate from the aqueous environment. Here we describe the three-dimensional structure of the homologous enzyme from Streptomyces refined to 1.5 A resolution. Structural comparisons to the enzyme from B. sterolicum reveal significant conformational differences in these loop regions; in particular, a region of the loop comprising residues 78-87 adopts a small amphipathic helical turn with hydrophobic residues directed toward the active site cavity and hydrophilic residues directed toward the external surface of the molecule. It seems reasonable that this increased rigidity reduces the entropy loss that occurs upon binding substrate. Consequently, the Streptomyces enzyme is a more efficient catalyst. In addition, we have determined the structures of three active site mutants which have significantly reduced activity for either the oxidation (His447Asn and His447Gln) or the isomerization (Glu361Gln). Our structural and kinetic data indicate that His447 and Glu361 act as general base catalysts in association with conserved water H2O541 and Asn485. The His447, Glu361, H2O541, and Asn485 hydrogen bond network is conserved among other oxidoreductases. This catalytic tetrad appears to be a structural motif that occurs in flavoenzymes that catalyze the oxidation of unactivated alcohols.
10426959	Functional changes in the structure of the SRP GTPase on binding GDP and Mg2+GDP.	Ffh is a component of a bacterial ribonucleoprotein complex homologous to the signal recognition particle (SRP) of eukaryotes. It comprises three domains that mediate both binding to the hydrophobic signal sequence of the nascent polypeptide and the GTP-dependent interaction of Ffh with a structurally homologous GTPase of the SRP receptor. The X-ray structures of the two-domain 'NG' GTPase of Ffh in complex with Mg2+GDP and GDP have been determined at 2.0 A resolution. The structures explain the low nucleotide affinity of Ffh and locate two regions of structural mobility at opposite sides of the nucleotide-binding site. One of these regions includes highly conserved sequence motifs that presumably contribute to the structural trigger signaling the GTP-bound state. The other includes the highly conserved interface between the N and G domains, and supports the hypothesis that the N domain regulates or signals the nucleotide occupancy of the G domain.
2372535	Coupling between local structure and global stability of a protein: mutants of staphylococcal nuclease.	Staphylococcal nuclease exists in solution as a mixture of two folded (N and N') and two unfolded (U and U*) forms. Earlier workers [Evans et al. (1989) Biochemistry 28, 362] have proposed that the N'/N and U/U* structural differences involve cis/trans isomerization about the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond with N and U cis and N' and U* trans. The present results show that residue changes throughout the nuclease structure have large effects on the distribution of the N and N'forms. The N'/N ratios at 313 K for nuclease H124L (N'/N = 0.07) and nuclease G79S (N'/N = 12) differ by 2 orders of magnitude. Thermodynamic parameters for equilibria linking the two folded and two unfolded substates were evaluated for seven mutants of nuclease which were found by kinetic assays to have similar enzymatic activities but by NMR spectroscopy to have a wide dispersion of thermal stabilities. Our results indicate that mutational perturbations of the N'/N equilibrium in folded nuclease (delta G for the N in equilibrium N' reaction) are strongly coupled to changes in the stability of the N form (delta G for the N in equilibrium U reaction), but much less so to the stability of the N' form (delta G for the N' in equilibrium U* reaction).
11731805	Domain alternation switches B(12)-dependent methionine synthase to the activation conformation.	B(12)-dependent methionine synthase (MetH) from Escherichia coli is a large modular protein that uses bound cobalamin as an intermediate methyl carrier. Major domain rearrangements have been postulated to explain how cobalamin reacts with three different substrates: homocysteine, methyltetrahydrofolate and S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet). Here we describe the 3.0 A structure of a 65 kDa C-terminal fragment of MetH that spans the cobalamin- and AdoMet-binding domains, arranged in a conformation suitable for the methyl transfer from AdoMet to cobalamin that occurs during activation. In the conversion to the activation conformation, a helical domain that capped the cofactor moves 26 A and rotates by 63 degrees, allowing formation of a new interface between cobalamin and the AdoMet-binding (activation) domain. Interactions with the MetH activation domain drive the cobalamin away from its binding domain in a way that requires dissociation of the axial cobalt ligand and, thereby, provide a mechanism for control of the distribution of enzyme conformations.
12359875	X-ray structure of a bifunctional protein kinase in complex with its protein substrate HPr.	HPr kinase/phosphorylase (HprK/P) controls the phosphorylation state of the phosphocarrier protein HPr and regulates the utilization of carbon sources by Gram-positive bacteria. It catalyzes both the ATP-dependent phosphorylation of Ser-46 of HPr and its dephosphorylation by phosphorolysis. The latter reaction uses inorganic phosphate as substrate and produces pyrophosphate. We present here two crystal structures of a complex of the catalytic domain of Lactobacillus casei HprK/P with Bacillus subtilis HPr, both at 2.8-A resolution. One of the structures was obtained in the presence of excess pyrophosphate, reversing the phosphorolysis reaction and contains serine-phosphorylated HPr. The complex has six HPr molecules bound to the hexameric kinase. Two adjacent enzyme subunits are in contact with each HPr molecule, one through its active site and the other through its C-terminal helix. In the complex with serine-phosphorylated HPr, a phosphate ion is in a position to perform a nucleophilic attack on the phosphoserine. Although the mechanism of the phosphorylation reaction resembles that of eukaryotic protein kinases, the dephosphorylation by inorganic phosphate is unique to the HprK/P family of kinases. This study provides the structure of a protein kinase in complex with its protein substrate, giving insights into the chemistry of the phospho-transfer reactions in both directions.
15843024	Structural insights into fusidic acid resistance and sensitivity in EF-G.	Fusidic acid (FA) is a steroid antibiotic commonly used against Gram positive bacterial infections. It inhibits protein synthesis by stalling elongation factor G (EF-G) on the ribosome after translocation. A significant number of the mutations conferring strong FA resistance have been mapped at the interfaces between domains G, III and V of EF-G. However, direct information on how such mutations affect the structure has hitherto not been available. Here we present the crystal structures of two mutants of Thermus thermophilus EF-G, G16V and T84A, which exhibit FA hypersensitivity and resistance in vitro, respectively. These mutants also have higher and lower affinity for GTP respectively than wild-type EF-G. The mutations cause significant conformational changes in the switch II loop that have opposite effects on the position of a key residue, Phe90, which undergoes large conformational changes. This correlates with the importance of Phe90 in FA sensitivity reported in previous studies. These structures substantiate the importance of the domain G/domain III/domain V interfaces as a key component of the FA binding site. The mutations also cause subtle changes in the environment of the "P-loop lysine", Lys25. This led us to examine the conformation of the equivalent residue in all structures of translational GTPases, which revealed that EF-G and eEF2 form a group separate from the others and suggested that the role of Lys25 may be different in the two groups.
9126844	Crystal structure of a maltotetraose-forming exo-amylase from Pseudomonas stutzeri.	The three-dimensional structure of an exo-type alpha-amylase from Pseudomonas stutzeri which degrades starch from its non-reducing end to produce maltotetraose has been determined by X-ray structure analysis. The catalytic domain of this enzyme (G4-2), whose structure was determined, is a product of spontaneous limited proteolysis in culture broth. It has 429 amino acid residues and a molecular mass of 47,200, and crystallizes in ammonium sulfate solution at pH 7.5. The structure was elucidated by the multiple isomorphous replacement method and refined at 2.0 A resolution, resulting in a final R-factor of 0.178 for significant reflections with a root-mean-square deviation from ideality in bond distances of 0.013 A. The polypeptide chain of this molecule folds into three domains; the first with a (beta/alpha)8 barrel structure, the second with an excursed part from the first one, and the third with five-stranded antiparallel beta-sheets. The active cleft is formed on the C-terminal side of the beta-sheets in the (beta/alpha)8 barrel as in the known endo-type alpha-amylases. A histidine side-chain nitrogen ND1 is coordinated to one of the bound calcium ion. The recognition site of the non-reducing end of the amylose that determines exo-wise degradation is presumed to be at one end of this cleft where there is a disordered loop consisting of the 66th to 72nd residues, and a loop carrying an aspartic acid (Asp160). These structural features may be responsible for the binding of the non-reducing end of the substrate amylose.
7820548	Structures of poliovirus complexes with anti-viral drugs: implications for viral stability and drug design.	BACKGROUND: Picornaviruses, such as the structurally related polioviruses and rhinoviruses, are important human pathogens which have been the target of major drug development efforts. Receptor-mediated uncoating and thermal inactivation of poliovirus and rhinovirus are inhibited by agents that bind to each virus by inserting into a pocket in the beta barrel of the viral capsid protein, VP1. This pocket, which is normally empty in human rhinovirus-14 (HRV14), is occupied by an unknown natural ligand in poliovirus. Structural studies of HRV14-drug complexes have shown that drug binding causes large, localized changes in the conformation of VP1. RESULTS: We report the crystal structures of six complexes between poliovirus and capsid-binding, antiviral drugs, including complexes of four different drugs with the Sabin vaccine strain of type 3 poliovirus, and complexes of one of these drugs with two other poliovirus strains that contain sequence differences in the drug-binding site. In each complex, the changes in capsid structure associated with drug binding are limited to minor adjustments in the conformations of a few side chains lining the binding site. CONCLUSIONS: The minor structural changes caused by drug binding suggest a model of drug action in which it is the conformational changes prevented by the bound drug, rather than obvious conformational changes induced by drug binding, which exert the biological effect. Our results, along with additional structures of rhinovirus-drug complexes, suggest possible improvements in drug design, and provide important clues about the nature of the conformational changes that are involved in the uncoating process.
12215417	Structural basis for AMPA receptor activation and ligand selectivity: crystal structures of five agonist complexes with the GluR2 ligand-binding core.	Glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter within the mammalian CNS, playing an important role in many different functions in the brain such as learning and memory. In this study, a combination of molecular biology, X-ray structure determinations, as well as electrophysiology and binding experiments, has been used to increase our knowledge concerning the ionotropic glutamate receptor GluR2 at the molecular level. Five high-resolution X-ray structures of the ligand-binding domain of GluR2 (S1S2J) complexed with the three agonists (S)-2-amino-3-[3-hydroxy-5-(2-methyl-2H-tetrazol-5-yl)isoxazol-4-yl]propionic acid (2-Me-Tet-AMPA), (S)-2-amino-3-(3-carboxy-5-methylisoxazol-4-yl)propionic acid (ACPA), and (S)-2-amino-3-(4-bromo-3-hydroxy-isoxazol-5-yl)propionic acid (Br-HIBO), as well as of a mutant thereof (S1S2J-Y702F) in complex with ACPA and Br-HIBO, have been determined. The structures reveal that AMPA agonists with an isoxazole moiety adopt different binding modes in the receptor, dependent on the substituents of the isoxazole. Br-HIBO displays selectivity among different AMPA receptor subunits, and the design and structure determination of the S1S2J-Y702F mutant in complex with Br-HIBO and ACPA have allowed us to explain the molecular mechanism behind this selectivity and to identify key residues for ligand recognition. The agonists induce the same degree of domain closure as AMPA, except for Br-HIBO, which shows a slightly lower degree of domain closure. An excellent correlation between domain closure and efficacy has been obtained from electrophysiology experiments undertaken on non-desensitising GluR2i(Q)-L483Y receptors expressed in oocytes, providing strong evidence that receptor activation occurs as a result of domain closure. The structural results, combined with the functional studies on the full-length receptor, form a powerful platform for the design of new selective agonists.
11509552	Backbone dynamics of plastocyanin in both oxidation states. Solution structure of the reduced form and comparison with the oxidized state.	A model-free analysis based on (15)N R(1), (15)N R(2), and (15)N-(1)H nuclear Overhauser effects was performed on reduced (diamagnetic) and oxidized (paramagnetic) forms of plastocyanin from Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. The protein backbone is rigid, displaying a small degree of mobility in the sub-nanosecond time scale. The loops surrounding the copper ion, involved in physiological electron transfer, feature a higher extent of flexibility in the longer time scale in both redox states, as measured from D(2)O exchange of amide protons and from NH-H(2)O saturation transfer experiments. In contrast to the situation for other electron transfer proteins, no significant difference in the dynamic properties is found between the two redox forms. A solution structure was also determined for the reduced plastocyanin and compared with the solution structure of the oxidized form in order to assess possible structural changes related to the copper ion redox state. Within the attained resolution, the structure of the reduced plastocyanin is indistinguishable from that of the oxidized form, even though small chemical shift differences are observed. The present characterization provides information on both the structural and dynamic behavior of blue copper proteins in solution that is useful to understand further the role(s) of protein dynamics in electron transfer processes.
8069625	NMR analysis of the residual structure in the denatured state of an unusual mutant of staphylococcal nuclease.	BACKGROUND: Staphylococcal nuclease is a well-developed model system for analyzing the effects of mutations on protein folding and stability. Substitution of glycine 88 with valine (Gly88Val) destabilizes staphylococcal nuclease by 1.0 kcal mole-1 and reduces its sensitivity to the denaturant guanidine hydrochloride, a phenomenon which may indicate an increase in residual structure in the denatured state. To assess its effects on denatured state structure, the Gly88Val mutation was incorporated into a 136 residue nonsense fragment which has been developed as a model of the wild type denatured state. RESULTS: Application of two- and three-dimensional NMR spectroscopy to the Gly88Val fragment uniformly labeled with 15N and 13C has led to the assignment of 93 of the 136 residues. Comparison of chemical shifts of backbone resonances to those of wild type native nuclease, analysis of the secondary shifts of the assigned resonances and nuclear Overhauser effects involving backbone protons indicate that, unlike the wild type fragment, most if not all of the five-stranded beta-barrel structure persists in this denatured state. CONCLUSION: One major effect of the Gly88Val mutation is to perturb the cooperative breakdown of the folded conformation, leading to a denatured state which is both more ordered and more stable than that formed by the wild type sequence. Since the equilibrium between the native and denatured states depends on the free energy difference between them, stabilization of the denatured state by the Gly88Val mutation indirectly destabilizes the native state.
2553983	Crystal structure of the p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase-substrate complex refined at 1.9 A resolution. Analysis of the enzyme-substrate and enzyme-product complexes.	Using synchrotron radiation, the X-ray diffraction intensities of crystals of p-hydroxy-benzoate hydroxylase, complexed with the substrate p-hydroxybenzoate, were measured to a resolution of 1.9 A. Restrained least-squares refinement alternated with rebuilding in electron density maps yielded an atom model of the enzyme-substrate complex with a crystallographic R-factor of 15.6% for 31,148 reflections between 6.0 and 1.9 A. A total of 330 solvent molecules was located. In the final model, only three residues have deviating phi-psi angle combinations. One of them, the active site residue Arg44, has a well-defined electron density and may be strained to adopt this conformation for efficient catalysis. The mode of binding of FAD is distinctly different for the different components of the coenzyme. The adenine ring is engaged in three water-mediated hydrogen bonds with the protein, while making only one direct hydrogen bond with the enzyme. The pyrophosphate moiety makes five water-mediated versus three direct hydrogen bonds. The ribityl and ribose moieties make only direct hydrogen bonds, in all cases, except one, with side-chain atoms. The isoalloxazine ring also makes only direct hydrogen bonds, but virtually only with main-chain atoms. The conformation of FAD in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is strikingly similar to that in glutathione reductase, while the riboflavin-binding parts of these two enzymes have no structural similarity at all. The refined 1.9 A structure of the p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase-substrate complex was the basis of further refinement of the 2.3 A structure of the enzyme-product complex. The result was a final R-factor of 16.7% for 14,339 reflections between 6.0 and 2.3 A and an improved geometry. Comparison between the complexes indicated only small differences in the active site region, where the product molecule is rotated by 14 degrees compared with the substrate in the enzyme-substrate complex. During the refinements of the enzyme-substrate and enzyme-product complexes, the flavin ring was allowed to bend or twist by imposing planarity restraints on the benzene and pyrimidine ring, but not on the flavin ring as a whole. The observed angle between the benzene ring and the pyrimidine ring was 10 degrees for the enzyme-substrate complex and 19 degrees for the enzyme-product complex. Because of the high temperature factors of the flavin ring in the enzyme-product complex, the latter value should be treated with caution. Six out of eight peptide residues near the flavin ring are oriented with their nitrogen atom pointing towards the ring.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
9405053	Active site of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A from Lactococcus lactis investigated by chemical modification and mutagenesis.	The flavin-containing enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHOD) catalyzes the oxidation of dihydroorotate (DHO) to orotate, the first aromatic intermediate in pyrimidine biosynthesis. The first structure of a DHOD, the A form of the enzyme from Lactococcus lactis, has recently become known, and some conserved residues were suggested to have a role in the active site [Rowland et al. (1997) Structure 2, 239-252]. In particular, Cys 130 was hypothesized to work as a base, which activates dihydroorotate (DHO) for hydride transfer. By chemical modification and site-directed mutagenesis we have obtained results consistent with this proposal. Cys 130 was susceptible to alkylating reagents, and mutants of Cys 130 (C130A and C130S) showed hardly detectable enzyme activity at pH 8.0, while at pH 10 the C130S mutant enzyme had approximately 1% of wild-type activity. Mutants of Lys 43, Asn 132, and Lys 164 were also constructed. Exchange of Lys 43 to Ala or Glu (K43A and K43E) and of Asn 132 to Ala (N132A) affected both catalysis and substrate binding. Expressed as kcat/KM for DHO, the deterioration of these three mutant enzymes was 10(3)-10(4)-fold. Flavin spectra of the mutant enzymes were not, like the wild-type enzyme, bleached by DHO in stopped-flow experiments, showing that they were deficient with respect to the first half-reaction, namely reduction of FMN by DHO, which was not rate limiting for the wild-type enzyme. The binding interaction between flavin and the reaction product, orotate, could be monitored by a red shift of the flavin absorbance in the wild-type enzyme. The C130A, C130S, and N132A mutant enzymes displayed similar capacity to bind orotate. In contrast, orotate did not change the absorption spectra of the K43 mutant enzymes, although it did inhibit their activity. All of the mutant enzymes, except K164A, contained normal levels of flavin. The results are discussed in relation to the structures of DHODA and other flavoenzymes. The possible acid-base chemistry of Cys 130 is compared to previous work on mammalian dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenases, flavoenzymes, which catalyze the reversed reaction, namely the reduction of pyrimidine bases.
6049071	Three-dimensional structure of tosyl-alpha-chymotrypsin.	null
16222336	Nup50/Npap60 function in nuclear protein import complex disassembly and importin recycling.	Nuclear import of proteins containing classical nuclear localization signals (NLS) is mediated by the importin-alpha:beta complex that binds cargo in the cytoplasm and facilitates its passage through nuclear pores, after which nuclear RanGTP dissociates the import complex and the importins are recycled. In vertebrates, import is stimulated by nucleoporin Nup50, which has been proposed to accompany the import complex through nuclear pores. However, we show here that the Nup50 N-terminal domain actively displaces NLSs from importin-alpha, which would be more consistent with Nup50 functioning to coordinate import complex disassembly and importin recycling. The crystal structure of the importin-alpha:Nup50 complex shows that Nup50 binds at two sites on importin-alpha. One site overlaps the secondary NLS-binding site, whereas the second extends along the importin-alpha C-terminus. Mutagenesis indicates that interaction at both sites is required for Nup50 to displace NLSs. The Cse1p:Kap60p:RanGTP complex structure suggests how Nup50 is then displaced on formation of the importin-alpha export complex. These results provide a rationale for understanding the series of interactions that orchestrate the terminal steps of nuclear protein import.
9237914	Three-dimensional structure of the DNA-binding domain of the fructose repressor from Escherichia coli by 1H and 15N NMR.	FruR is an Escherichia coli transcriptional regulator that belongs to the LacI DNA-binding protein family. By using 1H and 15N NMR spectroscopy, we have determined the three-dimensional solution structure of the FruR N-terminal DNA-binding domain consisting of 57 amino acid residues. A total of 809 NMR-derived distances and 54 dihedral angle constraints have been used for molecular modelling with the X-PLOR program. The resulting set of calculated structures presents an average root-mean-square deviation of 0.37 A at the main-chain level for the first 47 residues. This highly defined N-terminal part of the structure reveals a similar topology for the three alpha-helices when compared to the 3D structures of LacI and PurR counterparts. The most striking difference lies in the connection between helix II and helix III, in which three additional residues are present in FruR. This connecting segment is well structured and contains a type III turn. Apart from hydrophobic interactions of non-polar residues with the core of the domain, this connecting segment is stabilised by several hydrogen bonds and by the aromatic ring stacking between Tyr19 of helix II and Tyr28 of the turn. The region containing the putative "hinge helix" (helix IV), that has been described in PurR-DNA complex to make specific base contacts in the minor groove of DNA, is unfolded. Examination of hydrogen bonds highlights the importance of homologous residues that seem to be conserved for their ability to fulfill helix N and C-capping roles in the LacI repressor family.
11562168	Crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of human transglutaminase 3 from zymogen to active form.	Transglutaminases(TGases; protein-glutamine-glutamyl-transferases) are a large family of calcium-dependent acyl-transfer enzymes that catalyze the formation of covalent cross links in proteins. Of these, the "epidermal" or "hair follicle" TGase 3 isoform is critically involved in barrier formation in epithelia. It is a zymogen, requiring proteolytic activation to achieve maximal specific activity. In order to understand its structure and function, we have devised methods for the rapid large-scale expression of the TGase 3 zymogen in the baculovirus system, and here we describe the purification of the zymogen and activated forms. We describe methods for the formation of high-quality, well-diffracting crystals within 3-5 days, using both dioxane and beta-octylglucoside to overcome severe twinning problems. The crystal of the zymogen belongs to the triclinic space group P1 and diffracts to 2.2-A resolution, and the crystal of the active form belongs to the P2(1) space group at 2.7-A resolution.
9917143	Assignment of 1H, 13C and 15N signals of the inhibitor protein Im9 bound to the DNase domain of colicin E9.	null
8663370	Thermal stability of hexameric and tetrameric nucleoside diphosphate kinases. Effect of subunit interaction.	The eukaryotic nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) kinases are hexamers, while the bacterial NDP kinases are tetramers made of small, single domain subunits. These enzymes represent an ideal model for studying the effect of subunit interaction on protein stability. The thermostability of NDP kinases of each class was studied by differential scanning calorimetry and biochemical methods. The hexameric NDP kinase from Dictyostelium discoideum displays one single, irreversible differential scanning calorimetry peak (Tm 62 degrees C) over a broad protein concentration, indicating a single step denaturation. The thermal stability of the protein was increased by ADP. The P105G substitution, which affects a loop implicated in subunit contacts, yields a protein that reversibly dissociates to folded monomers at 38 degrees C before the irreversible denaturation occurs (Tm 47 degrees C). ADP delays the dissociation, but does not change the Tm. These data indicate a "coupling" of the quaternary structure with the tertiary structure in the wild-type, but not in the mutated protein. We describe the x-ray structure of the P105G mutant at 2.2-A resolution. It is very similar to that of the wild-type protein. Therefore, a minimal change in the structure leads to a dramatic change of protein thermostability. The NDP kinase from Escherichia coli behaves like the P105G mutant of the Dictyostelium NDP kinase. The detailed study of their thermostability is important, since biological effects of thermolabile NDP kinases have been described in several organisms.
8250907	Force-generating domain of myosin motor.	To understand the underlying mechanism of force generation by myosin motor, it is crucial to know which part of the molecule is essential for the process. Recent structure determination of myosin motor domain at atomic resolution has revealed that the domain comprises two smaller domains, the "ATPase domain" consisting of only an N-terminal segment of the heavy chain and the "neck domain" consisting of a long alpha-helix of the heavy chain and two light chains. This atomic structure begs the question of whether both domains are required for force generation. To answer it, we genetically truncated the head to generate a recombinant fragment composed of the "ATPase domain" alone. The truncated head drove sliding movement of actin filaments and generated force in a novel in vitro assay system, which allows us to hold a specific site of the head on a glass surface. These results indicate that the compact ATPase domain functions as a force-generating machinery of the myosin motor.
8070396	The crystal structure of elongation factor G complexed with GDP, at 2.7 A resolution.	Elongation factor G (EF-G) catalyzes the translocation step of protein synthesis in bacteria, and like the other bacterial elongation factor, EF-Tu--whose structure is already known--it is a member of the GTPase superfamily. We have determined the crystal structure of EF-G--GDP from Thermus thermophilus. It is an elongated molecule whose large, N-terminal domain resembles the G domain of EF-Tu, except for a 90 residue insert, which covers a surface that is involved in nucleotide exchange in EF-Tu and other G proteins. The tertiary structures of the second domains of EF-G and EF-Tu are nearly identical, but the relative placement of the first two domains in EF-G--GDP resembles that seen in EF-Tu--GTP, not EF-Tu--GDP. The remaining three domains of EF-G look like RNA binding domains, and have no counterparts in EF-Tu.
10828980	Crystal structure and iron-binding properties of the R210K mutant of the N-lobe of human lactoferrin: implications for iron release from transferrins.	Lactoferrin (Lf) and serum transferrin (Tf) combine high-affinity iron binding with an ability to release this iron at reduced pH. Lf, however, retains iron to significantly lower pH than Tf, giving the two proteins distinct functional roles. In this paper, we compared the iron-release profiles for human Lf, Tf, and their N-lobe half-molecules Lf(N) and Tf(N) and showed that half of the difference in iron retention at low pH ( approximately 1.3 pH units) results from interlobe interactions in Lf. To probe factors intrinsic to the N-lobes, we further examined the specific role of two basic residues that are proposed to form a pH-sensitive dilysine trigger for iron release in the N-lobe of Tf [Dewan, J. C., Mikami, B., Hirose, M., and Sacchettini, J. C. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 11963-11968] by mutating Arg 210 to Lys in the N-lobe half-molecule Lf(N). The R210K mutant was expressed, purified, and crystallized, and its crystal structure was determined and refined at 2.0-A resolution to a final R factor (R(free)) of 19.8% (25.0%). The structure showed that Lys 210 and Lys 301 in R210K do not form a dilysine interaction like that between Lys 206 and Lys 296 in human Tf. The R210K mutant retained iron to lower pH than Tf(N), consistent with the absence of the dilysine interaction but released iron at approximately 0.7 pH units higher than Lf(N). We conclude that (i) the ability of Lf to retain iron to significantly lower pH than Tf is due equally to interlobe interactions and to the absence in Lfs of an interaction analogous to the dilysine pair in Tfs, even when two lysines are present at the corresponding sequence positions, and (ii) an appropriately positioned basic residue (Arg 210 in human Lf) modulates iron release by inhibiting protonation of the N-lobe iron ligands, specifically His 253.
15299710	Refined crystal structure of the catalytic domain of xylanase A from Pseudomonas fluorescens at 1.8 A resolution.	The three-dimensional structure of native xylanase A from Pseudomonas flouorescens subspecies cellulosa has been refined at 1.8 A resolution. The space group is P2(1)2(1)2(1) with four molecules in the asymmetric unit. The final model has an R factor of 0.166 for 103 749 reflections with the four molecules refined independently. The tertiary structure consists of an eightfold beta/alpha-barrel, the so-called TIM-barrel fold. The active site is in an open cleft at the carboxy-terminal end of the beta/alpha-barrel, and the active-site residues are a pair of glutamates, Glu127 on strand 4 and Glu246 on strand 7. Both these catalytic glutamate residues are found on beta-bulges. An atypically long loop after strand 7 is stabilized by calcium. Unusual features include a non-proline cis-peptide residue Ala80 which is found on a beta-bulge at the end of beta-strand 3. The three beta-bulge type distortions occurring on beta-strands 3, 4 and 7 are functionally significant as they serve to orient important active-site residues. The active-site residues are further held in place by an extensive hydrogen-bonding network of active-site residues in the catalytic site of xylanase A. A chain of well ordered water molecules occupies the substrate-binding cleft, some or all of which are expelled on binding of the substrate.
12730686	Structural insights into the catalytic mechanism of cyclophilin A.	Cyclophilins constitute a ubiquitous protein family whose functions include protein folding, transport and signaling. They possess both sequence-specific binding and proline cis-trans isomerase activities, as exemplified by the interaction between cyclophilin A (CypA) and the HIV-1 CA protein. Here, we report crystal structures of CypA in complex with HIV-1 CA protein variants that bind preferentially with the substrate proline residue in either the cis or the trans conformation. Cis- and trans-Pro substrates are accommodated within the enzyme active site by rearrangement of their N-terminal residues and with minimal distortions in the path of the main chain. CypA Arg55 guanidinium group probably facilitates catalysis by anchoring the substrate proline oxygen and stabilizing sp3 hybridization of the proline nitrogen in the transition state.
12144516	The importance of CH/pi interactions to the function of carbohydrate binding proteins.	It is suggested that the interactions between the hydrophobic C-H groups of carbohydrate residues and the pi-electron systems of aromatic amino-acid residues play an important role in the ligand-recognition function of carbohydrate-binding proteins. This review focuses on our recent structural and functional studies of human lysozyme and hevein-domain type lectins (wheat-germ agglutinin and Ac-AMP2) aimed at understanding how CH/pi interactions are involved in the actual binding events.
14568540	Structural consequences of accommodation of four non-cognate amino acid residues in the S1 pocket of bovine trypsin and chymotrypsin.	Crystal structures of P1 Gly, Val, Leu and Phe bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) variants in complex with two serine proteinases, bovine trypsin and chymotrypsin, have been determined. The association constants for the four mutants with the two enzymes show that the enlargement of the volume of the P1 residue is accompanied by an increase of the binding energy, which is more pronounced for bovine chymotrypsin. Since the conformation of the P1 side-chains in the two S1 pockets is very similar, we suggest that the difference in DeltaG values between the enzymes must arise from the more polar environment of the S1 site of trypsin. This results mainly from the substitutions of Met192 and Ser189 observed in chymotrypsin with Gln192 and Asp189 present in trypsin. The more polar interior of the S1 site of trypsin is reflected by a much higher order of the solvent network in the empty pocket of the enzyme, as is observed in the complexes of the two enzymes with the P1 Gly BPTI variant. The more optimal binding of the large hydrophobic P1 residues by chymotrypsin is also reflected by shrinkage of the S1 pocket upon the accommodation of the cognate residues of this enzyme. Conversely, the S1 pocket of trypsin expands upon binding of such side-chains, possibly to avoid interaction with the polar residues of the walls. Further differentiation between the two enzymes is achieved by small differences in the shape of the S1 sites, resulting in an unequal steric hindrance of some of the side-chains, as observed for the gamma-branched P1 Leu variant of BPTI, which is much more favored by bovine chymotrypsin than trypsin. Analysis of the discrimination of beta-branched residues by trypsin and chymotrypsin is based on the complexes with the P1 Val BPTI variant. Steric repulsion of the P1 Val residue by the walls of the S1 pocket of both enzymes prevents the P1 Val side-chain from adopting the most optimal chi1 value.
12649440	Intermolecular ion pairs maintain the toroidal structure of Pyrococcus furiosus PCNA.	Two mutant proliferating cell nuclear antigens from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus, PfuPCNA(D143A) and PfuPCNA(D143A/D147A), were prepared by site-specific mutagenesis. The results from gel filtration showed that mutations at D143 and D147 drastically affect the stability of the trimeric structure of PfuPCNA. The PfuPCNA(D143A) still retained the activity to stimulate the DNA polymerase reaction, but PfuPCNA(D143A/D147A) lost the activity. Crystal structures of the mutant PfuPCNAs were determined. Although the wild-type PCNA forms a toroidal trimer with intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the N- and C-terminal domains, the mutant PfuPCNAs exist as V-shaped dimers through intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the two C-terminal domains in the crystal. Because the mutated residues are involved in the intermolecular ion pairs through their side chains in the wild-type PfuPCNA, these ion pairs seem to play a key role in maintaining the toroidal structure of the PfuPCNA trimer. The comparison of the crystal structures revealed intriguing conformational flexibility of each domain in the PfuPCNA subunit. This structural versatility of PCNA may be involved in the mechanisms for ring opening and closing.
16271889	Bovine mitochondrial peroxiredoxin III forms a two-ring catenane.	A crystal structure is reported for the C168S mutant of a typical 2-Cys peroxiredoxin III (Prx III) from bovine mitochondria at a resolution of 3.3 A. Prx III is present as a two-ring catenane comprising two interlocking dodecameric toroids that are assembled from basic dimeric units. Each ring has an external diameter of 150 A and encompasses a central cavity that is 70 A in width. The concatenated dodecamers are inclined at an angle of 55 degrees, which provides a large contact surface between the rings. Dimer-dimer contacts involved in toroid formation are hydrophobic in nature, whereas the 12 areas of contact between interlocked rings arise from polar interactions. These two major modes of subunit interaction provide important insights into possible mechanisms of catenane formation.
2463371	Mutations that alter the pore function of the OmpF porin of Escherichia coli K12.	We describe the isolation and characterization of mutations in ompF that alter the pore properties of the OmpF porin. The selection makes use of the fact that maltodextrins larger than maltotriose are too large to diffuse through the normal OmpF pore. By demanding growth on maltodextrins (Dex+) in the absence of the LamB protein, which is normally required for the uptake of these large sugars, we are able to obtain ompF mutations. These include transversions, transitions and small deletions. We obtained almost exclusively ompF mutations in spite of the fact that analogous alterations in ompC can result in similar phenotypes. Fifteen independent point mutations identify residues R42, R82, D113 and R132 of the mature peptide as important in pore function. The alterations result in uncharged amino acids being substituted for charged amino acids. Growth tests, antibiotic sensitivities and rates of [14C]maltose uptake suggest that the alterations result in an increased pore size. Small deletions of six to 15 amino acid residues in the region between A108 and V133 of mature OmpF dramatically alter outer membrane permeability to hydrophobic antibiotics and detergents as well as conferring a Dex+ phenotype. We suggest that these mutations affect both the pore function and interactions with other outer membrane components. A model of OmpF protein structure based on general rules for folding membrane proteins and these mutations is presented.
1259752	A new plot for allosteric phenomena.	null
8176740	Solvent rearrangement in an antigen-antibody interface introduced by site-directed mutagenesis of the antibody combining site.	The three-dimensional structure of a site-directed mutant of the bacterially expressed Fv fragment from monoclonal antibody D1.3, complexed to the specific antigen lysozyme has been determined to a nominal resolution of 1.8 A using X-ray diffraction data. The replacement of VL Trp92 by Asp allows two water molecules to occupy space taken by Trp92 in the wild-type complex, in agreement with a previous observation that water molecules play an important role in stabilizing this antigen-antibody complex. The equilibrium constant for the binding of the mutant Fv to the antigen decreases by three orders of magnitude (from 2.3 x 10(8) M-1 to 2.6 x 10(5) M-1). Titration calorimetry shows that this results from a smaller negative binding enthalpy (delta delta H = -16 kJ mol-1 at 24 degrees C), whereas the value of the binding entropy is not affected. Since in the complex between the mutated Fv and antigen the buried area has decreased relative to that of the wild-type Fv by about 150 A2, the contribution of the buried unit area to the decrease in free energy (delta Gzero) is approximately 117 J mol-1 (28 cal mol-1) per A2. The loss of interatomic contacts in replacing Trp by Asp permits an approximate calculation for the contribution of van der Waals interactions made by Trp92 in this complex, which gives an average of 2.1 kJ mol-1 (0.5 kcal mol-1) for contacts between carbon atoms.
6414511	Structure of the complex of Streptomyces griseus protease B and the third domain of the turkey ovomucoid inhibitor at 1.8-A resolution.	The structure of the complex between the serine protease Streptomyces griseus protease B (SGPB) and the third domain of the Kazal-type ovomucoid inhibitor from turkey has been solved at 1.8-A resolution and refined to a conventional R factor of 0.125. As others have reported previously for analogous complexes of proteases and protein inhibitors, the inhibitor binds in a fashion similar to that of a substrate; it is not cleaved, but there is a close approach (2.7 A) of the active site nucleophile Ser-195 O gamma to the carbonyl carbon of the reactive peptide bond of the inhibitor. Contrary to the structural reports regarding the other enzyme-inhibitor complexes, we conclude that there is no evidence for a significant distortion of this peptide bond from planarity. The mechanism of inhibition can be understood in terms of the equilibrium thermodynamic parameters Ka, the enzyme-inhibitor association constant, and Khyd, the equilibrium constant for inhibitor hydrolysis. These thermodynamic parameters can be rationalized in terms of the observed structure.
9145102	Specific protein recognition of an mRNA cap through its alkylated base.	The specific binding of N7-methylguanine cap analogues to the RNA methyltransferase VP39 was observed through X-ray crystallography, providing a prototypical structure for a complex between a protein and an mRNA 5' cap.
9655825	Drug design against a shifting target: a structural basis for resistance to inhibitors in a variant of influenza virus neuraminidase.	BACKGROUND: Inhibitors of the influenza virus neuraminidase have been shown to be effective antiviral agents in humans. Several studies have reported the selection of novel influenza strains when the virus is cultured with neuraminidase inhibitors in vitro. These resistant viruses have mutations either in the neuraminidase or in the viral haemagglutinin. Inhibitors in which the glycerol sidechain at position 6 of 2-deoxy-2,3-dehydro-N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac2en) has been replaced by carboxamide-linked hydrophobic substituents have recently been reported and shown to select neuraminidase variants. This study seeks to clarify the structural and functional consequences of replacing the glycerol sidechain of the inhibitor with other chemical constituents. RESULTS: The neuraminidase variant Arg292-->Lys is modified in one of three arginine residues that encircle the carboxylate group of the substrate. The structure of this variant in complex with the carboxamide inhibitor used for its selection, and with other Neu5Ac2en analogues, is reported here at high resolution. The structural consequences of the mutation correlate with altered inhibitory activity of the compounds compared with wild-type neuraminidase. CONCLUSIONS: The Arg292-->Lys variant of influenza neuraminidase affects the binding of substrate by modification of the interaction with the substrate carboxylate. This may be one of the structural correlates of the reduced enzyme activity of the variant. Inhibitors that have replacements for the glycerol at position 6 are further affected in the Arg292-->Lys variant because of structural changes in the binding site that apparently raise the energy barrier for the conformational change in the enzyme required to accommodate such inhibitors. These results provide evidence that a general strategy for drug design when the target has a high mutation frequency is to design the inhibitor to be as closely related as possible to the natural ligands of the target.
10970744	Crystal structures of mouse class II alcohol dehydrogenase reveal determinants of substrate specificity and catalytic efficiency.	The structure of mouse class II alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH2) has been determined in a binary complex with the coenzyme NADH and in a ternary complex with both NADH and the inhibitor N-cyclohexylformamide to 2.2 A and 2.1 A resolution, respectively. The ADH2 dimer is asymmetric in the crystal with different orientations of the catalytic domains relative to the coenzyme-binding domains in the two subunits, resulting in a slightly different closure of the active-site cleft. Both conformations are about half way between the open apo structure and the closed holo structure of horse ADH1, thus resembling that of ADH3. The semi-open conformation and structural differences around the active-site cleft contribute to a substantially different substrate-binding pocket architecture as compared to other classes of alcohol dehydrogenase, and provide the structural basis for recognition and selectivity of alcohols and quinones. The active-site cleft is more voluminous than that of ADH1 but not as open and funnel-shaped as that of ADH3. The loop with residues 296-301 from the coenzyme-binding domain is short, thus opening up the pocket towards the coenzyme. On the opposite side, the loop with residues 114-121 stretches out over the inter-domain cleft. A cavity is formed below this loop and adds an appendix to the substrate-binding pocket. Asp301 is positioned at the entrance of the pocket and may control the binding of omega-hydroxy fatty acids, which act as inhibitors rather than substrates. Mouse ADH2 is known as an inefficient ADH with a slow hydrogen-transfer step. By replacing Pro47 with His, the alcohol dehydrogenase activity is restored. Here, the structure of this P47H mutant was determined in complex with NADH to 2.5 A resolution. His47 is suitably positioned to act as a catalytic base in the deprotonation of the substrate. Moreover, in the more closed subunit, the coenzyme is allowed a position closer to the catalytic zinc. This is consistent with hydrogen transfer from an alcoholate intermediate where the Pro/His replacement focuses on the function of the enzyme.
11148047	Amino acid residues in ribonuclease MC1 from bitter gourd seeds which are essential for uridine specificity.	The ribonuclease MC1 (RNase MC1), isolated from seeds of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia), consists of 190 amino acids and is characterized by specific cleavage at the 5'-side of uridine. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to evaluate the contribution of four amino acids, Asn71, Val72, Leu73, and Arg74, at the alpha4-alpha5 loop between alpha4 and alpha5 helices for recognition of uracil base by RNase MC1. Four mutants, N71T, V72L, L73A, and R74S, in which Asn71, Val72, Leu73, and Arg74 in RNase MC1 were substituted for the corresponding amino acids, Thr, Leu, Ala, and Ser, respectively, in a guanylic acid preferential RNase NW from Nicotiana glutinosa, were prepared and characterized with respect to enzymatic activity. Kinetic analysis with a dinucleoside monophosphate, CpU, showed that the mutant N71T exhibited 7.0-fold increased K(m) and 2.3-fold decreased k(cat), while the mutant L73A had 14.4-fold increased K(m), although it did retain the k(cat) value comparable to that of the wild-type. In contrast, replacements of Val72 and Arg74 by the corresponding amino acids Leu and Ser, respectively, had little effect on the enzymatic activity. This observation is consistent with findings in the crystal structure analysis that Asn71 and Leu73 are responsible for a uridine specificity for RNase MC1. The role of Asn71 in enzymatic reaction of RNase MC1 was further investigated by substituting amino acids Ala, Ser, Gln, and Asp. Our observations suggest that Asn71 has at least two roles: one is base recognition by hydrogen bonding, and the other is to stabilize the conformation of the alpha4-alpha5 loop by hydrogen bonding to the peptide backbone, events which possibly result in an appropriate orientation of the alpha-helix (alpha5) containing active site residues. Mutants N71T and N71S showed a remarkable shift from uracil to guanine specificity, as evaluated by cleavage of CpG, although they did exhibit uridine specificity against yeast RNA and homopolynucleotides.
8434007	Crystal structure of Escherichia coli L-asparaginase, an enzyme used in cancer therapy.	The crystal structure of Escherichia coli asparaginase II (EC 3.5.1.1), a drug (Elspar) used for the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia, has been determined at 2.3 A resolution by using data from a single heavy atom derivative in combination with molecular replacement. The atomic model was refined to an R factor of 0.143. This enzyme, active as a homotetramer with 222 symmetry, belongs to the class of alpha/beta proteins. Each subunit has two domains with unique topological features. On the basis of present structural evidence consistent with previous biochemical studies, we propose locations for the active sites between the N- and C-terminal domains belonging to different subunits and postulate a catalytic role for Thr-89.
9466928	The effects of steric mutations on the structure of type III antifreeze protein and its interaction with ice.	The interaction of proteins with ice is poorly understood and difficult to study, partly because ice is transitory and can present many binding surfaces, and partly because structures have been determined for only two ice-binding proteins. This paper focuses on one of these, a 66-residue antifreeze protein (AFP) from eel pout. The high resolution X-ray structure of this fish AFP demonstrated that the proposed ice-binding surface is remarkably flat for such a small protein. The residues on the planar surface thought to be involved in ice binding are restrained by hydrogen bonds or by tight packing of their side-chains. To probe the requirement for a flat binding surface, a conserved alanine in the center of the AFP planar surface was substituted with larger residues. Six alanine replacement mutants (Ala16 > Cys, Thr, Met, Arg, His and Tyr), designed to disrupt the planarity of the surface and sterically block binding to ice, were characterized by X-ray crystallography and compared with the wild-type AFP. In each case, the detail provided by these crystal structures has helped explain the effects of the mutation on antifreeze activity. The substitutions, Ala16 > His and Ala16 > Tyr, were large enough to shield Gln44, one of the putative ice-binding residues, contributing to their very low thermal hysteresis activity. In addition to sterically hindering the putative ice-binding site, the bulkier residues also caused shifts in the putative ice-binding residues owing to the tight packing of side-chains on the planar surface. This unexpected consequence of the mutations helps account for the severely reduced antifreeze activity. One explanation for residual antifreeze activity in some of the mutants lies in the possibility that AFPs have a role in shaping the site on the ice to which they bind. Thus, side-chain dislocations might be partially accommodated by ice that can freeze around them. It is evident that the disruption of the planarity, by introducing larger residues at the center of the proposed ice-binding site, is not the only factor responsible for the loss of antifreeze activity. There are multiple causes including positional change and steric blockage of some putative ice-binding residues.
1881877	1.59 A structure of trypsin at 120 K: comparison of low temperature and room temperature structures.	The structure of a rat trypsin mutant [S195C] at a temperature of 120 K has been refined to a crystallographic R factor of 17.4% between 12.0 and 1.59 A and is compared with the structure of the D102N mutant at 295 K. A reduction in the unit cell dimensions in going from room temperature to low temperature is accompanied by a decrease in molecular surface area and radius of gyration. The overall structure remains similar to that at room temperature. The attainable resolution appears to be improved due to the decrease in the fall off of intensities with resolution [reduction of the temperature factor]. This decreases the uncertainty in the atomic positions and allows the localization of more protein atoms and solvent molecules in the low temperature map. The largest differences between the two models occur at residues with higher than average temperature factors. Several features can be localized in the solvent region of the 120 K map that are not seen in the 295 K map. These include several more water molecules as well as an interstitial sulfate ion and two interstitial benzamidine molecules.
15210687	Structural insights into the Thermus thermophilus ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase mechanism via crystal structures with the bound substrate and metal.	ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase (ADPRase) catalyzes the divalent metal ion-dependent hydrolysis of ADP-ribose to ribose 5'-phosphate and AMP. This enzyme plays a key role in regulating the intracellular ADP-ribose levels, and prevents nonenzymatic ADP-ribosylation. To elucidate the pyrophosphatase hydrolysis mechanism employed by this enzyme, structural changes occurring on binding of substrate, metal and product were investigated using crystal structures of ADPRase from an extreme thermophile, Thermus thermophilus HB8. Seven structures were determined, including that of the free enzyme, the Zn(2+)-bound enzyme, the binary complex with ADP-ribose, the ternary complexes with ADP-ribose and Zn(2+) or Gd(3+), and the product complexes with AMP and Mg(2+) or with ribose 5'-phosphate and Zn(2+). The structural and functional studies suggested that the ADP-ribose hydrolysis pathway consists of four reaction states: bound with metal (I), metal and substrate (II), metal and substrate in the transition state (III), and products (IV). In reaction state II, Glu-82 and Glu-70 abstract a proton from a water molecule. This water molecule is situated at an ideal position to carry out nucleophilic attack on the adenosyl phosphate, as it is 3.6 A away from the target phosphorus and almost in line with the scissile bond.
8259514	The role of backbone flexibility in the accommodation of variants that repack the core of T4 lysozyme.	To understand better how the packing of side chains within the core influences protein structure and stability, the crystal structures were determined for eight variants of T4 lysozyme, each of which contains three to five substitutions at adjacent interior sites. Concerted main-chain and side-chain displacements, with movements of helical segments as large as 0.8 angstrom, were observed. In contrast, the angular conformations of the mutated side chains tended to remain unchanged, with torsion angles within 20 degrees of those in the wild-type structure. These observations suggest that not only the rotation of side chains but also movements of the main chain must be considered in the evaluation of which amino acid sequences are compatible with a given protein fold.
16403639	Mechanism of the Class I KDPG aldolase.	In vivo, 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (KDPG) aldolase catalyzes the reversible, stereospecific retro-aldol cleavage of KDPG to pyruvate and d-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The enzyme is a lysine-dependent (Class I) aldolase that functions through the intermediacy of a Schiff base. Here, we propose a mechanism for this enzyme based on crystallographic studies of wild-type and mutant aldolases. The three dimensional structure of KDPG aldolase from the thermophile Thermotoga maritima was determined to 1.9A. The structure is the standard alpha/beta barrel observed for all Class I aldolases. At the active site Lys we observe clear density for a pyruvate Schiff base. Density for a sulfate ion bound in a conserved cluster of residues close to the Schiff base is also observed. We have also determined the structure of a mutant of Escherichia coli KDPG aldolase in which the proposed general acid/base catalyst has been removed (E45N). One subunit of the trimer contains density suggesting a trapped pyruvate carbinolamine intermediate. All three subunits contain a phosphate ion bound in a location effectively identical to that of the sulfate ion bound in the T. maritima enzyme. The sulfate and phosphate ions experimentally locate the putative phosphate binding site of the aldolase and, together with the position of the bound pyruvate, facilitate construction of a model for the full-length KDPG substrate complex. The model requires only minimal positional adjustments of the experimentally determined covalent intermediate and bound anion to accommodate full-length substrate. The model identifies the key catalytic residues of the protein and suggests important roles for two observable water molecules. The first water molecule remains bound to the enzyme during the entire catalytic cycle, shuttling protons between the catalytic glutamate and the substrate. The second water molecule arises from dehydration of the carbinolamine and serves as the nucleophilic water during hydrolysis of the enzyme-product Schiff base. The second water molecule may also mediate the base-catalyzed enolization required to form the carbon nucleophile, again bridging to the catalytic glutamate. Many aspects of this mechanism are observed in other Class I aldolases and suggest a mechanistically and, perhaps, evolutionarily related family of aldolases distinct from the N-acetylneuraminate lyase (NAL) family.
9002524	Structure of the conserved GTPase domain of the signal recognition particle.	The signal-recognition particle (SRP) and its receptor (SR) function in the co-translational targeting of nascent protein-ribosome complexes to the membrane translocation apparatus. The SRP protein subunit (termed Ffh in bacteria) that recognizes the signal sequence of nascent polypeptides is a GTPase, as is the SR-alpha subunit (termed FtsY). Ffh and FtsY interact directly, each stimulating the GTP hydrolysis activity of the other. The sequence of Ffh suggests three domains: an amino-terminal N domain of unknown function, a central GTPase G domain, and a methionine-rich M domain that binds both SRP RNA and signal peptides. Sequence conservation suggests that structurally similar N and G domains are present in FtsY. Here we report the structure of the nucleotide-free form of the NG fragment of Ffh. Consistent with a role for apo Ffh in protein targeting, the side chains of the empty active-site pocket form a tight network of interactions which may stabilize the nucleotide-free protein. The structural relationship between the two domains suggests that the N domain senses or controls the nucleotide occupancy of the GTPase domain. A structural subdomain unique to these evolutionarily conserved GTPases constitutes them as a distinct subfamily in the GTPase superfamily.
11827517	X-ray crystal structures of D100E trichodiene synthase and its pyrophosphate complex reveal the basis for terpene product diversity.	The 2.4 A resolution X-ray crystal structure of D100E trichodiene synthase and the 2.6 A resolution structure of its complex with inorganic pyrophosphate are reported. The D100E amino acid substitution in the so-called "aspartate-rich" motif does not result in large changes to the overall structure of the enzyme. In the pyrophosphate complex, however, pyrophosphate coordinates two Mg(2+) ions at the mouth of the active site without causing large changes in the structure of the enzyme. This contrasts with pyrophosphate binding in the wild-type enzyme, where pyrophosphate coordinates three Mg(2+) ions and triggers a significant conformational change that closes the mouth of the active site and optimizes packing density in the enzyme-substrate complex. The attenuation of active site closure in D100E trichodiene synthase compromises enzyme-substrate packing density and confers additional spatial and conformational degrees of freedom on the substrate and carbocation intermediates, which in turn results in the formation of five alternate sesquiterpene products in addition to trichodiene. By extension, then, the diversity of terpene cyclases in biology may have evolved in part by amino acid substitutions that fine-tune structural changes dependent on metal-diphosphate complexation that govern the formation of the active site template and enzyme-substrate packing density.
8990497	Dynamics of Fusarium solani cutinase investigated through structural comparison among different crystal forms of its variants.	In characterizing mutants and covalently inhibited complexes of Fusarium solani cutinase, which is a 197-residue lipolytic enzyme, 34 variant structures, crystallizing in 8 different crystal forms, have been determined, mostly at high resolution. Taking advantage of this considerable body of information, a structural comparative analysis was carried out to investigate the dynamics of cutinase. Surface loops were identified as the major flexible protein regions, particularly those forming the active-site groove, whereas the elements constituting the protein scaffold were found to retain the same conformation in all the cutinase variants studied. Flexibility turned out to be correlated with thermal motion. With a given crystal packing environment, a high flexibility turned out to be correlated with a low involvement in crystal packing contacts. The high degree of crystal polymorphism, which allowed different conformations with similar energy to be detected, made it possible to identify motions which would have remained unidentified if only a single crystal form had been available. Fairly good agreement was found to exist between the data obtained from the structural comparison and those from a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation carried out on the native enzyme. The crystallographic approach used in this study turned out to be a suitable tool for investigating cutinase dynamics. Because of the availability of a set of closely related proteins in different crystal environments, the intrinsic drawback of a crystallographic approach was bypassed. By combining several static pictures, the dynamics of the protein could be monitored much more realistically than what can be achieved on the basis of static pictures alone.
11513582	Crystal structure of thrombin-ecotin reveals conformational changes and extended interactions.	The protease inhibitor ecotin fails to inhibit thrombin despite its broad specificity against serine proteases. A point mutation (M84R) in ecotin results in a 1.5 nM affinity for thrombin, 10(4) times stronger than that of wild-type ecotin. The crystal structure of bovine thrombin is determined in complex with ecotin M84R mutant at 2.5 A resolution. Surface loops surrounding the active site cleft of thrombin have undergone significant structural changes to permit inhibitor binding. Particularly, the insertion loops at residues 60 and 148 in thrombin, which likely mediate the interactions with macromolecules, are displaced when the complex forms. Thrombin and ecotin M84R interact in two distinct surfaces. The loop at residue 99 and the C-terminus of thrombin contact ecotin through mixed polar and nonpolar interactions. The active site of thrombin is filled with eight consecutive amino acids of ecotin and demonstrates thrombin's preference for specific features that are compatible with the thrombin cleavage site: negatively charged-Pro-Val-X-Pro-Arg-hydrophobic-positively charged (P1 Arg is in bold letters). The preference for a Val at P4 is clearly defined. The insertion at residue 60 may further affect substrate binding by moving its adjacent loops that are part of the substrate recognition sites.
12618186	Crystal structure of a transition state mimic for Tdp1 assembled from vanadate, DNA, and a topoisomerase I-derived peptide.	Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase (Tdp1) is a member of the phospholipase D superfamily and acts as a DNA repair enzyme that removes stalled topoisomerase I- DNA complexes by hydrolyzing the bond between a tyrosine side chain and a DNA 3' phosphate. Despite the complexity of the substrate of this phosphodiesterase, vanadate succeeded in linking human Tdp1, a tyrosine-containing peptide, and a single-stranded DNA oligonucleotide into a quaternary complex that mimics the transition state for the first step of the catalytic reaction. The conformation of the bound substrate mimic gives compelling evidence that the topoisomerase I-DNA complex must undergo extensive modification prior to cleavage by Tdp1. The structure also illustrates that the use of vanadate as the central moiety in high-order complexes has the potential to be a general method for capturing protein-substrate interactions for phosphoryl transfer enzymes, even when the substrates are large, complicated, and unusual.
11455603	The crystal structure of chorismate lyase shows a new fold and a tightly retained product.	The enzyme chorismate lyase (CL) catalyzes the removal of pyruvate from chorismate to produce 4-hydroxy benzoate (4HB) for the ubiquinone pathway. In Escherichia coli, CL is monomeric, with 164 residues. We have determined the structure of the CL product complex by crystallographic heavy-atom methods and report the structure at 1.4-A resolution for a fully active double Cys-to-Ser mutant and at 2.0-A resolution for the wild-type. The fold involves a 6-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet with no spanning helices and novel connectivity. The product is bound internally, adjacent to the sheet, with its polar groups coordinated by two main-chain amides and by the buried side-chains of Arg 76 and Glu 155. The 4HB is completely sequestered from solvent in a largely hydrophobic environment behind two helix-turn-helix loops. The extensive product binding that is observed is consistent with biochemical measurements of slow product release and 10-fold stronger binding of product than substrate. Substrate binding and kinetically rate-limiting product release apparently require the rearrangement of these active-site-covering loops. Implications for the biological function of the high product binding are considered in light of the unique cellular role of 4HB, which is produced by cytoplasmic CL but is used by the membrane-bound enzyme 4HB octaprenyltransferase.
8841139	Three-dimensional structures of HIV-1 and SIV protease product complexes.	Strain is eliminated as a factor in hydrolysis of the scissile peptide bond by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV), based on the first eight complexes of products of hydrolysis with the enzymes. The carboxyl group generated at the scissile bond interacts with both catalytic aspartic acids. The structures directly suggest the interactions of the gemdiol intermediate with the active site. Based on the structures, the nucleophilic water is displaced stereospecifically by substrate binding toward one catalytic aspartic acid, while the scissile carbonyl becomes hydrogen bonded to the other catalytic aspartic acid in position for hydrolysis. Crystal structures for two N-terminal (P) products and two C-terminal (Q) products provide unambiguous density for the ligands at 2.2-2.6 A resolution and 17-21% R factors. The N-terminal product, Ac-S-L-N-F/, overlaps closely with the N-terminal sequences of peptidomimetic inhibitors bound to the protease. Comparison of the two C-terminal products, /F-L-E-K and /F(NO2)-E-A-Nle-S, indicates that the P2' residue is highly constrained, while the positioning of the P1' and P3' residues are sequence dependent.
7836457	How potassium affects the activity of the molecular chaperone Hsc70. I. Potassium is required for optimal ATPase activity.	Several functions of the 70-kilodalton heat shock cognate protein (Hsc70), such as peptide binding/release and clathrin uncoating, have been shown to require potassium ions. We have examined the effect of monovalent ions on the ATPase activity of Hsc70. The steady-state ATPase activities of Hsc70 and its amino-terminal 44-kDa ATPase fragment are minimal in the absence of K+ and reach a maximum at approximately 0.1 M [K+]. Activation of the ATPase turnover correlates with the ionic radii of monovalent ions; those that are at least 0.3 A smaller (Na+ and Li+) or larger (Cs+) than K+ show negligible activation, whereas ions with radii differing only approximately 0.1 A from that of K+ (NH4+ and Rb+) activate to approximately half the turnover rate observed with K+. Single turnover experiments with Hsc70 demonstrate that ATP hydrolysis is 5-fold slower with Na+ than with K+. The equilibrium binding of ADP or ATP to Hsc70 is unperturbed when K+ is replaced with Na+. These results are consistent with a role for monovalent ions as specific cofactors in the enzymatic hydrolysis of ATP.
11573087	Arsenate reductase from S. aureus plasmid pI258 is a phosphatase drafted for redox duty.	Arsenate reductase (ArsC) from Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pI258 plays a role in bacterial heavy metal resistance and catalyzes the reduction of arsenate to arsenite. The structures of the oxidized and reduced forms of ArsC were solved. ArsC has the PTPase I fold typical for low molecular weight tyrosine phosphatases (LMW PTPases). Remarkably, kinetic experiments show that pI258 ArsC also catalyzes the tyrosine phosphatase reaction in addition to arsenate reduction. These results provide evidence that ArsC from pI258 evolved from LMW PTPase by the grafting of a redox function onto a pre-existing catalytic site and that its evolutionary origin is different from those of arsenate reductases from Escherichia coli plasmid R773 and from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The mechanism proposed here for the catalysis of arsenate reduction by pI258 ArsC involves a nucleophilic attack by Cys 10 on arsenate, the formation of a covalent intermediate and the transport of oxidative equivalents by a disulfide cascade. The reaction is associated with major structural changes in the ArsC.
11779231	Non-standard insulin design: structure-activity relationships at the periphery of the insulin receptor.	The design of insulin analogues has emphasized stabilization or destabilization of structural elements according to established principles of protein folding. To this end, solvent-exposed side-chains extrinsic to the receptor-binding surface provide convenient sites of modification. An example is provided by an unfavorable helical C-cap (Thr(A8)) whose substitution by favorable amino acids (His(A8) or Arg(A8)) has yielded analogues of improved stability. Remarkably, these analogues also exhibit enhanced activity, suggesting that activity may correlate with stability. Here, we test this hypothesis by substitution of diaminobutyric acid (Dab(A8)), like threonine an amino acid of low helical propensity. The crystal structure of Dab(A8)-insulin is similar to those of native insulin and the related analogue Lys(A8)-insulin. Although no more stable than native insulin, the non-standard analogue is twice as active. Stability and affinity can therefore be uncoupled. To investigate alternative mechanisms by which A8 substitutions enhance activity, multiple substitutions were introduced. Surprisingly, diverse aliphatic, aromatic and polar side-chains enhance receptor binding and biological activity. Because no relationship is observed between activity and helical propensity, we propose that local interactions between the A8 side-chain and an edge of the hormone-receptor interface modulate affinity. Dab(A8)-insulin illustrates the utility of non-standard amino acids in hypothesis-driven protein design.
9770455	The anti-angiogenic agent fumagillin covalently modifies a conserved active-site histidine in the Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase.	Methionine aminopeptidase (MetAP) exists in two forms (type I and type II), both of which remove the N-terminal methionine from proteins. It previously has been shown that the type II enzyme is the molecular target of fumagillin and ovalicin, two epoxide-containing natural products that inhibit angiogenesis and suppress tumor growth. By using mass spectrometry, N-terminal sequence analysis, and electronic absorption spectroscopy we show that fumagillin and ovalicin covalently modify a conserved histidine residue in the active site of the MetAP from Escherichia coli, a type I enzyme. Because all of the key active site residues are conserved, it is likely that a similar modification occurs in the type II enzymes. This modification, by occluding the active site, may prevent the action of MetAP on proteins or peptides involved in angiogenesis. In addition, the results suggest that these compounds may be effective pharmacological agents against pathogenic and resistant forms of E. coli and other microorganisms.
8475042	Engineering cysteine mutants to obtain crystallographic phases with a cutinase from Fusarium solani pisi.	Cutinases are extracellular enzymes involved in the disruption of cutine, an insoluble polyester which covers the surface of plants. They belong to a class of serine esterases that are able to hydrolyse fatty acid esters and emulsified triglycerides as efficiently as lipases, but without displaying interfacial activation. Classical crystallographic methods for obtaining heavy-atom derivatives failed, so the cutinase structure has been solved exclusively by the multiple isomorphous replacement method using four Hg derivatives obtained from mutants S4C, S92C, S120C and S129C. Two of these derivatives behaved as expected: (i) the cys mutant of the catalytic Ser S120C, located at the surface of the active site pocket, leads to a good derivative; and (ii) the Hg atom of the derivative obtained with the S92C mutant is completely accessible to the solvent and occupies two alternative positions--consequently a poor derivative results. In contrast, two mutants show an unexpected behaviour: (i) the Hg atom in the S129C mutant was completely buried 10 A below the protein surface and yielded the best derivative; and (ii) a poor quality derivative was obtained with the S4C mutant. Cys 4 belongs to the disordered propeptide 1-16. The Cys 4 bound Hg atom is located in front of the Asp58 side chain, but neither Cys4 nor parts of the propeptide are clearly visible in the electron density maps of the derivative structure.
117110	Molecular structure of the alpha-lytic protease from Myxobacter 495 at 2.8 Angstroms resolution.	null
15117963	Crystal structures of Staphylococcus aureus sortase A and its substrate complex.	The cell wall envelope of staphylococci and other Gram-positive pathogens is coated with surface proteins that interact with human host tissues. Surface proteins of Staphylococcus aureus are covalently linked to the cell wall envelope by a mechanism requiring C-terminal sorting signals with an LPXTG motif. Sortase (SrtA) cleaves surface proteins between the threonine (T) and the glycine (G) of the LPXTG motif and catalyzes the formation of an amide bond between threonine at the C-terminal end of polypeptides and cell wall cross-bridges. The active site architecture and catalytic mechanism of sortase A has hitherto not been revealed. Here we present the crystal structures of native SrtA, of an active site mutant of SrtA, and of the mutant SrtA complexed with its substrate LPETG peptide and describe the substrate binding pocket of the enzyme. Highly conserved proline (P) and threonine (T) residues of the LPXTG motif are held in position by hydrophobic contacts, whereas the glutamic acid residue (E) at the X position points out into the solvent. The scissile T-G peptide bond is positioned between the active site Cys(184) and Arg(197) residues and at a greater distance from the imidazolium side chain of His(120). All three residues, His(120), Cys(184), and Arg(197), are conserved in sortase enzymes from Gram-positive bacteria. Comparison of the active sites of S. aureus sortase A and sortase B provides insight into substrate specificity and suggests a universal sortase-catalyzed mechanism of bacterial surface protein anchoring in Gram-positive bacteria.
9020766	Contribution of the hydrophobic effect to the stability of human lysozyme: calorimetric studies and X-ray structural analyses of the nine valine to alanine mutants.	To clarify the contribution of the hydrophobic effect to the conformational stability of human lysozyme, a series of Val to Ala mutants were constructed. The thermodynamic parameters for the denaturation of these nine mutant proteins were determined using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and the crystal structures were solved at high resolution. The denaturation Gibbs energy (delta delta G) and enthalpy (delta delta H) values of the mutant proteins ranged from +2.2 to- 6.3 kJ/mol and from +7 to -17 kJ/mol, respectively. The structural analyses showed that the mutation site and/or the residues around it in some proteins shifted toward the created cavity, and the substitutions affected not only the mutations site but also other parts far from the site, although the structural changes were not as great. Correlation between the changes in the thermodynamic parameters and the structural features of mutant proteins was examined, including the five Ile to Val mutant human lysozymes [Takano et al. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. 254, 62-76]. There was no simple general correlation between delta delta G and the changes in hydrophobic surface area exposed upon denaturation (delta delta ASAHP). We found only a new correlation between the delta delta G and delta delta ASAHP of all of the hydrophobic residues if the effect of the secondary structure propensity was taken into account.
7986100	Expression of a plant sesquiterpene cyclase gene in Escherichia coli.	5-Epi-aristolochene synthase is a sesquiterpene cyclase activity found in pathogen-challenged tobacco cells, but not in nonchallenged tissues, and appears to be encoded by a complex gene family. As a prerequisite to assessing the functional significance of these multiple genes, bacterial expression systems were examined for their capacity to express a tobacco sesquiterpene cyclase cDNA. Insertion of full-length 5-epi-aristolochene synthase cDNA into two commonly used expression vectors, pET-11d and pGBT-T19, resulted in high level expression of the cyclase activity. The highest level of expression occurred 3 h after induction with low concentrations (0.1-0.5 mM) of IPTG, incubation at 27 degrees C instead of 37 degrees C, and in the bacterial host strain BL21(DE3). Under these conditions, the cyclase protein constituted 5 to 8% of the soluble and 35% of the total Escherichia coli proteins. Enzyme reaction products of the native tobacco and recombinant enzyme were identical, based on argentation-thin layer chromatography. Deletion mutants of the cyclase gene corresponding to the amino and carboxy termini of the enzyme were prepared. The cyclase proteins resulting from bacterial expression of these mutant constructs were found largely in the insoluble protein fraction and no soluble enzyme activity was detected.
9655329	The crystal structure of Lactococcus lactis dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A complexed with the enzyme reaction product throws light on its enzymatic function.	Dihydroorotate dehydrogenases (DHODs) catalyze the oxidation of (S)-dihydroorotate to orotate, the fourth step and only redox reaction in the de novo biosynthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides. A description is given of the crystal structure of Lactococcus lactis dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A (DHODA) complexed with the product of the enzyme reaction orotate. The structure of the complex to 2.0 A resolution has been compared with the structure of the native enzyme. The active site of DHODA is known to contain a water filled cavity buried beneath a highly conserved and flexible loop. In the complex the orotate displaces the water molecules from the active site and stacks above the DHODA flavin isoalloxazine ring, causing only small movements of the surrounding protein residues. The orotate is completely buried beneath the protein surface, and the orotate binding causes a significant reduction in the mobility of the active site loop. The orotate is bound by four conserved asparagine side chains (Asn 67, Asn 127, Asn 132, and Asn 193), the side chains of Lys 43 and Ser 194, and the main chain NH groups of Met 69, Gly 70, and Leu 71. Of these the Lys 43 side chain makes hydrogen bonds to both the flavin isoalloxazine ring and the carboxylate group of the orotate. Potential interactions with bound dihydroorotate are considered using the orotate complex as a basis for molecular modeling. The role of Cys 130 as the active site base is discussed, and the sequence conservation of the active site residues across the different families of DHODs is reviewed, along with implications for differences in substrate binding and in the catalytic mechanisms between these families.
9757109	Continuous and discontinuous changes in the unit cell of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase crystals on dehydration.	A crystal form of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) complexed with inhibitors showed diffraction to a high-resolution limit of 3.7 A. Instability in the unit-cell dimensions of these crystals was observed during soaking experiments, but the range of this variability and consequent change in lattice order was revealed by a chance observation of dehydration. Deliberately induced dehydration results in crystals having a variety of unit cells, the best-ordered of which show diffraction to a minimum Bragg spacing of 2.2 A. In order to understand the molecular basis for this phenomenon, the initial observation of dehydration, the data sets from dehydrated crystals, the crystal packing and the domain conformation of RT are analysed in detail here. This analysis reveals that the crystals undergo remarkable changes following a variety of possible dehydration pathways: some changes occur gradually whilst others are abrupt and require significant domain rearrangements. Comparison of domain arrangements in different crystal forms gives insight into the flexibility of RT which, in turn, may reflect the internal motions allowing this therapeutically important enzyme to fulfill its biological function.
9705310	High resolution structure of the N-terminal domain of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 and characterization of its interaction site with matrix metalloproteinase-3.	The high resolution structure of the N-terminal domain of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 (N-TIMP-2) in solution has been determined using multidimensional heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy, with the structural calculations based on an extensive set of constraints, including 3132 nuclear Overhauser effect-based distance constraints, 56 hydrogen bond constraints, and 220 torsion angle constraints (an average of 26.9 constraints/residue). The core of the protein consists of a five-stranded beta-barrel that is homologous to the beta-barrel found in the oligosaccharide/oligonucleotide binding protein fold. The binding site for the catalytic domain of matrix metalloproteinases-3 (N-MMP-3) on N-TIMP-2 has been mapped by determining the changes in chemical shifts on complex formation for signals from the protein backbone (15N, 13C, and 1H). This approach identified a discrete N-MMP-3 binding site on N-TIMP-2 composed of the N terminus of the protein and the loops between beta-strands AB, CD, and EF. The beta-hairpin formed from strands A and B in N-TIMP-2 is significantly longer than the equivalent structure in TIMP-1, allowing it to make more extensive binding interactions with the MMP catalytic domain. A detailed comparison of the N-TIMP-2 structure with that of TIMP-1 bound to N-MMP-3 (Gomis-Ruth, F.-X., Maskos, K., Betz, M., Bergner, A., Huber, R., Suzuki, K., Yoshida, N., Nagase, H. , Brew, K., Bourne, G. P., Bartunik, H. & Bode, W. (1997) Nature 389, 77-80) revealed that the core beta-barrels are very similar in topology but that the loop connecting beta-strands CD (P67-C72) would need to undergo a large conformational change for TIMP-2 to bind in a similar manner to TIMP-1.
9571026	Structural and functional analysis of the 1:1 growth hormone:receptor complex reveals the molecular basis for receptor affinity.	The designed G120R mutant of human growth hormone (hGH) is an antagonist and can bind only one molecule of the growth hormone receptor. We have determined the crystal structure of the 1:1 complex between this mutant and the receptor extracellular domain (hGHbp) at 2.6 A resolution, and used it to guide a detailed survey of the structural and functional basis for hormone-receptor recognition. The overall structure of the complex is very similar to the equivalent portion of the 1:2 complex, showing that formation of the active complex does not involve major conformational changes. However, a segment involved in receptor-receptor interactions in the 1:2 complex is disordered in this structure, suggesting that its productive conformation is stabilized by receptor dimerization.The hormone binding site of the receptor comprises a central hydrophobic patch dominated by Trp104 and Trp169, surrounded by a hydrophilic periphery containing several well-ordered water molecules. Previous alanine scanning showed that the hydrophobic "hot spot" confers most of the binding energy. The new structural data, coupled with binding and kinetic analysis of further mutants, indicate that the hot spot is assembled cooperatively and that many residues contribute indirectly to binding. Several hydrophobic residues serve to orient the key tryptophan residues; kinetic analysis suggests that Pro106 locks the Trp104 main-chain into a required conformation. The electrostatic contacts of Arg43 to hGH are less important than the intramolecular packing of its alkyl chain with Trp169. The true functional epitope that directly contributes binding energy may therefore comprise as few as six side-chains, participating mostly in alkyl-aromatic stacking interactions. Outside the functional epitope, multiple mutation of residues to alanine resulted in non-additive increases in affinity: up to tenfold for a hepta-alanine mutant. Contacts in the epitope periphery can therefore attenuate the affinity of the central hot spot, perhaps reflecting a role in conferring specificity to the interaction.
12221284	Convergent evolution sheds light on the anti-beta -elimination mechanism common to family 1 and 10 polysaccharide lyases.	Enzyme-catalyzed beta-elimination of sugar uronic acids, exemplified by the degradation of plant cell wall pectins, plays an important role in a wide spectrum of biological processes ranging from the recycling of plant biomass through to pathogen virulence. The three-dimensional crystal structure of the catalytic module of a "family PL-10" polysaccharide lyase, Pel10Acm from Cellvibrio japonicus, solved at a resolution of 1.3 A, reveals a new polysaccharide lyase fold and is the first example of a polygalacturonic acid lyase that does not exhibit the "parallel beta-helix" topology. The "Michaelis" complex of an inactive mutant in association with the substrate trigalacturonate/Ca2+ reveals the catalytic machinery harnessed by this polygalacturonate lyase, which displays a stunning resemblance, presumably through convergent evolution, to the tetragalacturonic acid complex observed for a structurally unrelated polygalacturonate lyase from family PL-1. Common coordination of the -1 and +1 subsite saccharide carboxylate groups by a protein-liganded Ca2+ ion, the positioning of an arginine catalytic base in close proximity to the alpha-carbon hydrogen and numerous other conserved enzyme-substrate interactions, considered in light of mutagenesis data for both families, suggest a generic polysaccharide anti-beta-elimination mechanism.
11914495	Crystallization and preliminary X-ray crystallographic studies of a complex between the Lactococcus lactis Fpg DNA-repair enzyme and an abasic site containing DNA.	For protein-DNA complex crystallization, the choice of the DNA fragment is crucial. With the aim of crystallizing the 31 kDa Fpg DNA-repair enzyme bound to DNA, oligonucleotide duplexes varying in length, sequence, end type and nature of the specific DNA target site were used. Crystals of several protein-DNA combinations grew from solutions containing both polyethylene glycol and salt. This systematic crystallization screening followed by optimization of the crystallization conditions by microseeding led to crystals of Fpg bound to a 13 base-pair duplex DNA carrying the 1,3-propanediol abasic site analogue which are suitable for crystallographic analysis. Complete native data sets have been collected to 2.1 A resolution.
8855252	Potential use of additivity of mutational effects in simplifying protein engineering.	The problem of rationally engineering protein molecules can be simplified where effects of mutations on protein function are additive. Crystal structures of single and double mutants in the hydrophobic core of gene V protein indicate that structural and functional effects of core mutations are additive when the regions structurally influenced by the mutations do not substantially overlap. These regions of influence can provide a simple basis for identifying sets of mutations that will show additive effects.
16083884	Crystal structure of a mutant elongation factor G trapped with a GTP analogue.	Elongation factor G (EF-G) is a G protein factor that catalyzes the translocation step in protein synthesis on the ribosome. Its GTP conformation in the absence of the ribosome is currently unknown. We present the structure of a mutant EF-G (T84A) in complex with the non-hydrolysable GTP analogue GDPNP. The crystal structure provides a first insight into conformational changes induced in EF-G by GTP. Comparison of this structure with that of EF-G in complex with GDP suggests that the GTP and GDP conformations in solution are very similar and that the major contribution to the active GTPase conformation, which is quite different, therefore comes from its interaction with the ribosome.
11371559	Mutations in the G-domain of elongation factor G from Thermus thermophilus affect both its interaction with GTP and fusidic acid.	Two hypersensitive and two resistant variants of elongation factor-G (EF-G) toward fusidic acid are studied in comparison with the wild type factor. All mutated proteins are active in a cell-free translation system and ribosome-dependent GTP hydrolysis. The EF-G variants with the Thr-84-->Ala or Asp-109-->Lys mutations bring about a strong resistance of EF-G to the antibiotic, whereas the EF-Gs with substitutions Gly-16-->Val or Glu-119-->Lys are the first examples of fusidic acid-hypersensitive factors. A correlation between fusidic acid resistance of EF-G mutants and their affinity to GTP are revealed in this study, although their interactions with GDP are not changed. Thus, fusidic acid-hypersensitive mutants have the high affinity to an uncleavable GTP analog, but the association of resistant mutants with GTP is decreased. The effects of either fusidic acid-sensitive or resistant mutations can be explained by the conformational changes in the EF-G molecule, which influence its GTP-binding center. The results presented in this paper indicate that fusidic acid-sensitive mutant factors have a conformation favorable for GTP binding and subsequent interaction with the ribosomes.
2005620	Refined crystal structure of beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 at 2.0 A resolution.	The crystal structure of a class A beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 has been refined at 2.0 A resolution. The resulting crystallographic R-factor (R = sigma h parallel Fo[-]Fc parallel/sigma h[Fo], where [Fo] and [Fc] are the observed and calculated structure factor amplitudes, respectively), is 0.163 for the 17,547 reflections with I greater than or equal to 2 sigma (I) within the 8.0 A to 2.0 A resolution range. The molecule consists of two closely associated domains. One domain is formed by a five-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet with three helices packing against a face of the sheet. The second domain is formed mostly by helices that pack against the second face of the sheet. The active site is located in the interface between the two domains, and many of the residues that form it are conserved in all known sequences of class A beta-lactamases. Similar to the serine proteases, an oxyanion hole is implicated in catalysis. It is formed by two main-chain nitrogen atoms, that of the catalytic seryl residue, Ser70, and that of Gln237 on an edge beta-strand of the major beta-sheet. Ser70 is interacting with another conserved seryl residue, Ser130, located between the two ammonium groups of the functionally important lysine residues, Lys73 and Lys234. Such intricate interactions point to a possible catalytic role for this second seryl residue. Another key catalytic residue is Glu166. There are several unusual structural features associated with the active site. (1) A cis peptide bond has been identified between the catalytic Glu166 and Ile167. (2) Ala69 and Leu220 have strained phi, psi dihedral angles making close contacts that restrict the conformation of the active site beta-strand involved in the formation of the oxyanion hole. (3) A buried aspartate residue, the conserved Asp233, is located next to the active site Lys234. It is interacting with another buried aspartyl residue, Asp246. An internal solvent molecule is also involved, but the rest of its interactions with the protein indicate it is not a cation. (4) Another conserved aspartyl residue that is desolvated is Asp131, adjacent to Ser130. Its charge is stabilized by interactions with four main-chain nitrogen atoms. (5) An internal cavity underneath the active site depression is filled with six solvent molecules. This, and an adjacent cavity occupied by three solvent molecules partially separate the omega-loop associated with the active site from the rest of the protein.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
1871600	A novel, highly stable fold of the immunoglobulin binding domain of streptococcal protein G.	The high-resolution three-dimensional structure of a single immunoglobulin binding domain (B1, which comprises 56 residues including the NH2-terminal Met) of protein G from group G Streptococcus has been determined in solution by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy on the basis of 1058 experimental restraints. The average atomic root-mean-square distribution about the mean coordinate positions is 0.27 angstrom (A) for the backbone atoms, 0.65 A for all atoms, and 0.39 A for atoms excluding disordered surface side chains. The structure has no disulfide bridges and is composed of a four-stranded beta sheet, on top of which lies a long helix. The central two strands (beta 1 and beta 4), comprising the NH2- and COOH-termini, are parallel, and the outer two strands (beta 2 and beta 3) are connected by the helix in a +3x crossover. This novel topology (-1, +3x, -1), coupled with an extensive hydrogen-bonding network and a tightly packed and buried hydrophobic core, is probably responsible for the extreme thermal stability of this small domain (reversible melting at 87 degrees C).
25387	The structure of the flavoenzyme glutathione reductase.	The three-dimensional structure of the dimeric flavoenzyme glutathione reductase from human erythrocytes has been elucidated by an X-ray diffraction analysis at 0.3 nm resolution. The polypeptide chain has been traced, and the binding positions of FAD, NADP and glutathione have been determined. A mechanism for the electron transfer is discussed.
12827284	Isolation and characterization of hainantoxin-IV, a novel antagonist of tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium channels from the Chinese bird spider Selenocosmia hainana.	A neurotoxin, named hainantoxin-IV, was purified from the venom of the spider Selenocosmia hainana. The amino acid sequence was determined by Edman degradation, revealing it to be a 35-residue polypeptide amidated at its C terminal and including three disulfide bridges: Cys2-Cys17, Cys9-Cys24, and Cys16-Cys31 assigned by partial reduction and sequence analysis. Hainantoxin-IV shares 80% sequence identity with huwentoxin-IV from the spider S. huwena, a potent antagonist that acts at site 1 on tetrodotoxin-sensitive (TTX-S) sodium channels, suggesting that hainantoxin-IV adopts an inhibitor cystine knot structural motif like huwentoin-IV. Under whole-cell voltage-clamp conditions, this toxin has no effect on tetrodotoxin-resistant voltage-gated sodium channels in adult rat dorsal root ganglion neurons, while it blocks TTX-S sodium channels in a manner similar to huwentoxin-IV, and the actions of both toxins on sodium currents are very similar to that of tetrodotoxin. Thus, they define a new family of spider toxins affecting sodium channels.
14756552	Structural basis for the exocellulase activity of the cellobiohydrolase CbhA from Clostridium thermocellum.	Numerous bacterial and fungal organisms have evolved elaborate sets of modular glycoside hydrolases and similar enzymes aimed at the degradation of polymeric carbohydrates. Presently, on the basis of sequence similarity catalytic modules of these enzymes have been classified into 90 families. Representatives of a particular family display similar fold and catalytic mechanisms. However, within families distinctions occur with regard to enzymatic properties and type of activity against carbohydrate chains. Cellobiohydrolase CbhA from Clostridium thermocellum is a large seven-modular enzyme with a catalytic module belonging to family 9. In contrast to other representatives of that family possessing only endo- and, in few cases, endo/exo-cellulase activities, CbhA is exclusively an exocellulase. The crystal structures of the combination of the immunoglobulin-like module and the catalytic module of CbhA (Ig-GH9_CbhA) and that of an inactive mutant Ig-GH9_CbhA(E795Q) in complex with cellotetraose (CTT) are reported here. The detailed analysis of these structures reveals that, while key catalytic residues and overall fold are conserved in this enzyme and those of other family 9 glycoside hydrolases, the active site of GH9_CbhA is blocked off after the -2 subsite. This feature which is created by an extension and altered conformation of a single loop region explains the inability of the active site of CbhA to accommodate a long cellulose chain and to cut it internally. This altered loop region is responsible for the exocellulolytic activity of the enzyme.
11025547	X-ray crystallographic study of xylopentaose binding to Pseudomonas fluorescens xylanase A.	The structure of the complex between a catalytically compromised family 10 xylanase and a xylopentaose substrate has been determined by X-ray crystallography and refined to 3.2 A resolution. The substrate binds at the C-terminal end of the eightfold betaalpha-barrel of Pseudomonas fluorescens subsp. cellulosa xylanase A and occupies substrate binding subsites -1 to +4. Crystal contacts are shown to prevent the expected mode of binding from subsite -2 to +3, because of steric hindrance to subsite -2. The loss of accessible surface at individual subsites on binding of xylopentaose parallels well previously reported experimental measurements of individual subsites binding energies, decreasing going from subsite +2 to +4. Nine conserved residues contribute to subsite -1, including three tryptophan residues forming an aromatic cage around the xylosyl residue at this subsite. One of these, Trp 313, is the single residue contributing most lost accessible surface to subsite -1, and goes from a highly mobile to a well-defined conformation on binding of the substrate. A comparison of xylanase A with C. fimi CEX around the +1 subsite suggests that a flatter and less polar surface is responsible for the better catalytic properties of CEX on aryl substrates. The view of catalysis that emerges from combining this with previously published work is the following: (1) xylan is recognized and bound by the xylanase as a left-handed threefold helix; (2) the xylosyl residue at subsite -1 is distorted and pulled down toward the catalytic residues, and the glycosidic bond is strained and broken to form the enzyme-substrate covalent intermediate; (3) the intermediate is attacked by an activated water molecule, following the classic retaining glycosyl hydrolase mechanism.
16407973	Dual role of MutS glutamate 38 in DNA mismatch discrimination and in the authorization of repair.	MutS plays a critical role in DNA mismatch repair in Escherichia coli by binding to mismatches and initiating repair in an ATP-dependent manner. Mutational analysis of a highly conserved glutamate, Glu38, has revealed its role in mismatch recognition by enabling MutS to discriminate between homoduplex and mismatched DNA. Crystal structures of MutS have shown that Glu38 forms a hydrogen bond to one of the mismatched bases. In this study, we have analyzed the crystal structures, DNA binding and the response to ATP binding of three Glu38 mutants. While confirming the role of the negative charge in initial discrimination, we show that in vivo mismatch repair can proceed even when discrimination is low. We demonstrate that the formation of a hydrogen bond by residue 38 to the mismatched base authorizes repair by inducing intramolecular signaling, which results in the inhibition of rapid hydrolysis of distally bound ATP. This allows formation of the stable MutS-ATP-DNA clamp, a key intermediate in triggering downstream repair events.
10446375	Crystal structure of a ribonuclease from the seeds of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia) at 1.75 A resolution.	The ribonuclease MC1 (RNase MC1) from seeds of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia) consists of 190 amino acid residues with four disulfide bridges and belongs to the RNase T(2) family, including fungal RNases typified by RNase Rh from Rhizopus niveus and RNase T(2) from Aspergillus oryzae. The crystal structure of RNase MC1 has been determined at 1.75 A resolution with an R-factor of 19.7% using the single isomorphous replacement method. RNase MC1 structurally belongs to the (alpha+beta) class of proteins, having ten helices (six alpha-helices and four 3(10)-helices) and eight beta-strands. When the structures of RNase MC1 and RNase Rh are superposed, the close agreement between the alpha-carbon positions for the total structure is obvious: the root mean square deviations calculated only for structurally related 151 alpha-carbon atoms of RNase MC1 and RNase Rh molecules was 1.76 A. Furthermore, the conformation of the catalytic residues His-46, Glu-105, and His-109 in RNase Rh can be easily superposed with that of the possible catalytic residues His-34, Glu-84, and His-88 in RNase MC1. This observation strongly indicates that RNase MC1 from a plant origin catalyzes RNA degradation in a similar manner as fungal RNases.
15107837	Structures of HIV-1 RT-DNA complexes before and after incorporation of the anti-AIDS drug tenofovir.	Tenofovir, also known as PMPA, R-9-(2-(phosphonomethoxypropyl)adenine, is a nucleotide reverse transcriptase (RT) inhibitor. We have determined the crystal structures of two related complexes of HIV-1 RT with template primer and tenofovir: (i) a ternary complex at a resolution of 3.0 A of RT crosslinked to a dideoxy-terminated DNA with tenofovir-diphosphate bound as the incoming substrate; and (ii) a RT-DNA complex at a resolution of 3.1 A with tenofovir at the 3' primer terminus. The tenofovir nucleotide in the tenofovir-terminated structure seems to adopt multiple conformations. Some nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, including 3TC and AZT, have elements ('handles') that project beyond the corresponding elements on normal dNTPs (the 'substrate envelope'). HIV-1 RT resistance mechanisms to AZT and 3TC take advantage of these handles; tenofovir's structure lacks handles that could protrude through the substrate envelope to cause resistance.
12526797	Structures of the alpha L I domain and its complex with ICAM-1 reveal a shape-shifting pathway for integrin regulation.	The structure of the I domain of integrin alpha L beta 2 bound to the Ig superfamily ligand ICAM-1 reveals the open ligand binding conformation and the first example of an integrin-IgSF interface. The I domain Mg2+ directly coordinates Glu-34 of ICAM-1, and a dramatic swing of I domain residue Glu-241 enables a critical salt bridge. Liganded and unliganded structures for both high- and intermediate-affinity mutant I domains reveal that ligand binding can induce conformational change in the alpha L I domain and that allosteric signals can convert the closed conformation to intermediate or open conformations without ligand binding. Pulling down on the C-terminal alpha 7 helix with introduced disulfide bonds ratchets the beta 6-alpha 7 loop into three different positions in the closed, intermediate, and open conformations, with a progressive increase in affinity.
11045615	High resolution refinement of beta-galactosidase in a new crystal form reveals multiple metal-binding sites and provides a structural basis for alpha-complementation.	The unrefined fold of Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase based on a monoclinic crystal form with four independent tetramers has been reported previously. Here, we describe a new, orthorhombic form with one tetramer per asymmetric unit that has permitted refinement of the structure at 1.7 A resolution. This high-resolution analysis has confirmed the original description of the structure and revealed new details. An essential magnesium ion, identified at the active site in the monoclinic crystals, is also seen in the orthorhombic form. Additional putative magnesium binding sites are also seen. Sodium ions are also known to affect catalysis, and five putative binding sites have been identified, one close to the active site. In a crevice on the protein surface, five linked five-membered solvent rings form a partial clathrate-like structure. Some other unusual aspects of the structure include seven apparent cis-peptide bonds, four of which are proline, and several internal salt-bridge networks. Deep solvent-filled channels and tunnels extend across the surface of the molecule and pass through the center of the tetramer. Because of these departures from a compact globular shape, the molecule is not well characterized by prior empirical relationships between the mass and surface area of proteins. The 50 or so residues at the amino terminus have a largely extended conformation and mostly lie across the surface of the protein. At the same time, however, segment 13-21 contributes to a subunit interface, and residues 29-33 pass through a "tunnel" formed by a domain interface. Taken together, the overall arrangement provides a structural basis for the phenomenon of alpha-complementation.
8286366	Cutinase, a lipolytic enzyme with a preformed oxyanion hole.	Cutinases, a group of cutin degrading enzymes with molecular masses of around 22-25 kDa (Kolattukudy, 1984), are also able to efficiently hydrolyse triglycerides (De Geus et al., 1989; Lauwereys et al., 1991), but without exhibiting the interfacial activation phenomenom (Sarda et al., 1958). They belong to a class of proteins with a common structural framework, called the alpha/beta hydrolase fold (Martinez et al., 1992; Ollis et al., 1992). We describe herein the structure of cutinase covalently inhibited by diethyl-p-nitrophenyl phosphate (E600) and refined at 1.9-A resolution. Contrary to what has previously been reported with lipases (Brzozowski et al., 1991; Derewenda et al., 1992; Van Tilbeurgh et al., 1993), no significant structural rearrangement was observed here in cutinase upon the inhibitor binding. Moreover, the structure of the active site machinery, consisting of a catalytic triad (S120, H188, D175) and an oxyanion hole (Q121 and S42), was found to be identical to that of the native enzyme, whereas the oxyanion hole of Rhizomucor lipase (Brzozowski et al., 1991; Derewenda et al., 1992), like that of pancreatic lipase (van Tilbeurgh et al., 1993), is formed only upon enzyme-ligand complex formation. The fact that cutinase does not display interfacial activation cannot therefore only be due to the absence of a lid but might also be attributable to the presence of a preformed oxyanion hole.
11207290	Structural and functional consequences of altering a peptide MHC anchor residue.	To better understand TCR discrimination of multiple ligands, we have analyzed the crystal structures of two Hb peptide/I-E(k) complexes that differ by only a single amino acid substitution at the P6 anchor position within the peptide (E73D). Detailed comparison of multiple independently determined structures at 1.9 A resolution reveals that removal of a single buried methylene group can alter a critical portion of the TCR recognition surface. Significant variance was observed in the peptide P5-P8 main chain as well as a rotamer difference at LeuP8, approximately 10 A distal from the substitution. No significant variations were observed in the conformation of the two MHC class II molecules. The ligand alteration results in two peptide/MHC complexes that generate bulk T cell responses that are distinct and essentially nonoverlapping. For the Hb-specific T cell 3.L2, substitution reduces the potency of the ligand 1000-fold. Soluble 3.L2 TCR binds the two peptide/MHC complexes with similar affinity, although with faster kinetics. These results highlight the role of subtle variations in MHC Ag presentation on T cell activation and signaling.
9535826	Cryo-crystallography of a true substrate, indole-3-glycerol phosphate, bound to a mutant (alphaD60N) tryptophan synthase alpha2beta2 complex reveals the correct orientation of active site alphaGlu49.	The reversible cleavage of indole-3-glycerol by the alpha-subunit of tryptophan synthase has been proposed to be catalyzed by alphaGlu49 and alphaAsp60. Although previous x-ray crystallographic structures of the tryptophan synthase alpha2beta2 complex showed an interaction between the carboxylate of alphaAsp60 and the bound inhibitor indole-3-propanol phosphate, the carboxylate of alphaGlu49 was too distant to play its proposed role. To clarify the structural and functional roles of alphaGlu49, we have determined crystal structures of a mutant (alphaD60N) alpha2beta2 complex in the presence and absence of the true substrate, indole-3-glycerol phosphate. The enzyme in the crystal cleaves indole-3-glycerol phosphate very slowly at room temperature but not under cryo-conditions of 95 K. The structure of the complex with the true substrate obtained by cryo-crystallography reveals that indole-3-glycerol phosphate and indole-3-propanol phosphate have similar binding modes but different torsion angles. Most importantly, the side chain of alphaGlu49 interacts with 3-hydroxyl group of indole-3-glycerol phosphate as proposed. The movement of the side chain of alphaGlu49 into an extended conformation upon binding the true substrate provides evidence for an induced fit mechanism. Our results demonstrate how cryo-crystallography and mutagenesis can provide insight into enzyme mechanism.
8893827	Structure-based design of HIV protease inhibitors: sulfonamide-containing 5,6-dihydro-4-hydroxy-2-pyrones as non-peptidic inhibitors.	null
16522455	Three-dimensional structure and IgE-binding properties of mature fully active Der p 1, a clinically relevant major allergen.	BACKGROUND: Der p 1 is a 25-kd allergen with cysteine protease activity. Sensitization to Der p 1 affects a large proportion of individuals with allergy, resulting in rhinitis, asthma, and/or atopic dermatitis. OBJECTIVE: We determined the Der p 1 crystallographic structure to understand the relationships among structure, function, and allergenicity. METHODS: Recombinant pro-Der p 1 was produced in Pichia pastoris and allowed to mature spontaneously before purification by a 2-step procedure. Protease activity was checked by using a fluorogenic peptide substrate. Allergenicity was analysed by IgE binding assays and basophil activation test. The determination of the 3-dimensional structure was obtained by X-ray crystallography at 1.9 A resolution. RESULTS: The recombinant protein is fully active and expresses an allergenicity equivalent to its natural counterpart. Der p 1 exhibits a cysteine protease fold typical of the papain family, has a magnesium binding site, and forms dimers with a large interface. The crystal lattice shows that the dimers are tightly packed in a compact double layer of proteins. Such an assembly likely exists in dry fecal pellets, the natural form of allergen exposure, and appears ideal to interact with cell surface and trigger allergic inflammation. CONCLUSION: We present here the 3-dimensional structural features of mature fully active Der p 1, one of the main allergens involved in human allergic diseases. This opens the possibility to evaluate the importance of enzymatic activity in pathology and possible new therapeutic interventions.
2684274	Large increases in general stability for subtilisin BPN' through incremental changes in the free energy of unfolding.	Six individual amino acid substitutions at separate positions in the tertiary structure of subtilisin BPN' (EC 3.4.21.14) were found to increase the stability of this enzyme, as judged by differential scanning calorimetry and decreased rates of thermal inactivation. These stabilizing changes, N218S, G169A, Y217K, M50F, Q206C, and N76D, were discovered through the use of five different investigative approaches: (1) random mutagenesis; (2) design of buried hydrophobic side groups; (3) design of electrostatic interactions at Ca2+ binding sites; (4) sequence homology consensus; and (5) serendipity. Individually, the six amino acid substitutions increase the delta G of unfolding between 0.3 and 1.3 kcal/mol at 58.5 degrees C. The combination of these six individual stabilizing mutations together into one subtilisin BPN' molecule was found to result in approximately independent and additive increases in the delta G of unfolding to give a net increase of 3.8 kcal/mol (58.5 degrees C). Thermodynamic stability was also shown to be related to resistance to irreversible inactivation, which included elevated temperatures (65 degrees C) or extreme alkalinity (pH 12.0). Under these denaturing conditions, the rate of inactivation of the combination variant is approximately 300 times slower than that of the wild-type subtilisin BPN'. A comparison of the 1.8-A-resolution crystal structures of mutant and wild-type enzymes revealed only independent and localized structural changes around the site of the amino acid side group substitutions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
10877847	Chemically prepared hevein domains: effect of C-terminal truncation and the mutagenesis of aromatic residues on the affinity for chitin.	Chemically prepared hevein domains (HDs), N-terminal domain of an antifungal protein from Nicotiana tabacum (CBP20-N) and an antimicrobial peptide from Amaranthus caudatus (Ac-AMP2), were examined for their affinity for chitin, a beta-1,4-linked polymer of N-acetylglucosamine. An intact binding domain, CBP20-N, showed a higher affinity than a C-terminal truncated domain, Ac-AMP2. The formation of a pyroglutamate residue from N-terminal Gln of CBP20-N increased the affinity. The single replacement of any aromatic residue of Ac-AMP2 with Ala resulted in a significant reduction in affinity, suggesting the importance of the complete set of three aromatic residues in the ligand binding site. The mutations of Phe18 of Ac-AMP2 to the residues with larger aromatic rings, i.e. Trp, beta-(1-naphthyl)alanine or beta-(2-naphthyl)alanine, enhanced the affinity, whereas the mutation of Tyr20 to Trp reduced the affinity. The affinity of an HD for chitin might be improved by adjusting the size and substituent group of stacking aromatic rings.
7411611	Gene duplication in glutathione reductase.	null
11264581	Structures and comparison of the Y98H (2.0 A) and Y98W (1.5 A) mutants of flavodoxin (Desulfovibrio vulgaris).	The structures for two mutants at the Tyr98 site of Desulfovibrio vulgaris flavodoxin have been determined. The first, a tyrosine-to-histidine (Y98H) variant, was determined at the moderately high resolution of 2.0 A, while the tyrosine-to-tryptophan variant (Y98W) yielded very high resolution data (beyond 1.5 A) allowing a detailed look at the water structure, alternate side-chain conformations and the planarity of the FMN. Both structures were solved by molecular replacement beginning with the native (P2A) coordinates as a starting point. The Y98H variant of D. vulgaris flavodoxin crystallizes in space group P2(1)2(1)2(1), with unit-cell parameters a = 41.96, b = 61.45, c = 57.04 A, while the Y98W mutant adopts space group P2(1), with a = 41.29, b = 55.82, c = 32.52 A, beta = 100.68 degrees. Refinement for both mutants utilized PROLSQ followed by, for the high-resolution Y98W structure, anisotropic refinement as implemented in SHELXL. Final R factors of 17% for the Y98H mutant and 9.8% for the Y98W mutant were obtained. For the high-resolution (1.5 A) Y98W mutant, 31,010 unique reflections were collected from a single crystal. The final model includes 273 solvent molecules, with eight side chains assuming multiple conformations. At this resolution, the detailed conformation of the FMN can be observed, with both a bow and twist being noted. A comparison is made between the two mutants and the different oxidation states of the native flavodoxin. Although both mutants show similar E(2) (oxidized/semiquinone) one-electron redox potentials to the native, the E(1) (semiquinone/hydroquinone) redox potential for the Y98H mutant is significantly different from that of the Y98W variant and the native protein. The surprising similarity in the folding of the polypeptide chain 60--64 between the two mutants and the reduced states of the native is discussed. The interaction between O61 and N5 in the flavin is discussed because of the new conformation of this loop.
10194298	NMR solution structure of alpha-conotoxin ImI and comparison to other conotoxins specific for neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.	Alpha-Conotoxins, peptides produced by predatory species of Conus marine snails, are potent antagonists of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), ligand-gated ion channels involved in synaptic transmission. We determined the NMR solution structure of the smallest known alpha-conotoxin, ImI, a 12 amino acid peptide that binds specifically to neuronal alpha7-containing nAChRs in mammals. Calculation of the structure was based on a total of 80 upper distance constraints and 31 dihedral angle constraints resulting in 20 representative conformers with an average pairwise rmsd of 0.44 A from the mean structure for the backbone atoms N, Calpha, and C' of residues 2-11. The structure of ImI is characterized by two compact loops, defined by two disulfide bridges, which form distinct subdomains separated by a deep cleft. Two short 310-helical regions in the first loop are followed by a C-terminal beta-turn in the second. The two disulfide bridges and Ala 9 form a rigid hydrophobic core, orienting the other amino acid side chains toward the surface. Comparison of the three-dimensional structure of ImI to those of the larger, 16 amino acid alpha-conotoxins PnIA, PnIB, MII, and EpI-also specific for neuronal nAChRs-reveals remarkable similarity in local backbone conformations and relative solvent-accessible surface areas. The core scaffold is conserved in all five conotoxins, whereas the residues in solvent-exposed positions are highly variable. The second helical region, and the specific amino acids that the helix exposes to solvent, may be particularly important for binding and selectivity. This comparative analysis provides a three-dimensional structural basis for interpretation of mutagenesis data and structure-activity relationships for ImI as well other neuronal alpha-conotoxins.
9354379	Analysis of the stabilization of hen lysozyme by helix macrodipole and charged side chain interaction.	In the N-terminal region of the alpha-helix of the c-type lysozymes, two Asx residues exist at the 18th and 27th positions. Hen lysozyme has Asp18/Asn27 (18D/27N), and we prepared three mutant lysozymes, Asn18/Asn27 (18N/27N), Asn18/Asp27 (18N/27D), and Asp18/Asp27 (18D/27D). The stability of the wild-type (18D/27N) lysozyme supported the existence of a hydrogen bond between the side chain of Asp18 and the amide group at the N1 position in the alpha-helix, while the stability of the 18N/27D lysozyme supported the presence of the capping box between the Ser24 (N-cap) and Asp27 residues. Although electrostatic repulsion was observed between Asp18 and Asp27 residues in 18D/27D lysozyme, the dissociation of each residue contributed to stabilizing the B-helix in 18D/27D lysozyme through hydrogen bonding and charge-helix macrodipole interaction. This is the first evidence that two neighboring negative charges at the N-terminus of the helix both increased the stability of the protein.
8732756	Purification and characterization of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A from Lactococcus lactis, crystallization and preliminary X-ray diffraction studies of the enzyme.	Lactococcus lactis is the only organism known to contain two dihydroorotate dehydrogenases, i.e., the A- and B-forms. In this paper, we report the overproduction, purification, and crystallization of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A. In solution, the enzyme is bright yellow. It is a dimer of subunits (34 kDa) that contain one molecule of flavin mononucleotide each. The enzyme shows optimal function in the pH range 7.5-9.0. It is specific for L-dihydroorotate as substrate and can use dichlorophenolindophenol, potassium hexacyanoferrate (III), and, to a lower extent, also molecular oxygen as acceptors of the reducing equivalents, whereas the pyridine nucleotide coenzymes (NAD+, NADP+) and the respiratory quinones (i.e., vitamins Q6, Q10 and K2) were inactive. The enzyme has been crystallized from solutions of 30% polyethylene glycol, 0.2 M sodium acetate, and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. The resulting yellow crystals diffracted well and showed little sign of radiation damage during diffraction experiments. The crystals are monoclinic, space group P21 with unit cell dimensions a = 54.19 A, b = 109.23 A, c = 67.17 A, and beta = 104.5 degrees. A native data set has been collected with a completeness of 99.3% to 2.0 A and an Rsym value of 5.2%. Analysis of the solvent content and the self-rotation function indicates that the two subunits in the asymmetric unit are related by a noncrystallographic twofold axis perpendicular to the crystallographic b and c axes.
10508433	Crystallographic analysis of the binding modes of thiazoloisoindolinone non-nucleoside inhibitors to HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and comparison with modeling studies.	We have determined the crystal structures of thiazoloisoindolinone non-nucleoside inhibitors in complex with HIV-1 reverse transcriptase to high-resolution limits of 2.7 A (BM +21.1326) and 2. 52 A (BM +50.0934). We find that the binding modes of this series of inhibitors closely resemble that of "two-ring" non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. The structures allow rationalization of stereochemical requirements, structure-activity data, and drug resistance data. Comparisons with our previous structures suggest modifications to the inhibitors that might improve resilience to drug-resistant mutant forms of reverse transcriptase. Comparison with earlier modeling studies reveals that the predicted overlap of thiazoloisoindolinones with TIBO was largely correct, while that with nevirapine was significantly different.
2993920	Structure of a human common cold virus and functional relationship to other picornaviruses.	We report the first atomic resolution structure of an animal virus, human rhinovirus 14. It is strikingly similar to known icosahedral plant RNA viruses. Four neutralizing immunogenic regions have been identified. These, and corresponding antigenic sequences of polio and foot-and-mouth disease viruses, reside on external protrusions. A large cleft on each icosahedral face is probably the host cell receptor binding site.
8008071	Three-dimensional structure of beta-galactosidase from E. coli.	The beta-galactosidase from Escherichia coli was instrumental in the development of the operon model, and today is one of the most commonly used enzymes in molecular biology. Here we report the structure of this protein and show that it is a tetramer with 222-point symmetry. The 1,023-amino-acid polypeptide chain folds into five sequential domains, with an extended segment at the amino terminus. The participation of this amino-terminal segment in a subunit interface, coupled with the observation that each active site is made up of elements from two different subunits, provides a structural rationale for the phenomenon of alpha-complementation. The structure represents the longest polypeptide chain for which an atomic structure has been determined. Our results show that it is possible successfully to study non-viral protein crystals with unit cell dimensions in excess of 500 A and with relative molecular masses in the region of 2,000K per asymmetric unit. Non-crystallographic symmetry averaging proved to be a very powerful tool in the structure determination, as has been shown in other contexts.
12351824	Structural analysis of the two horseradish peroxidase catalytic residue variants H42E and R38S/H42E: implications for the catalytic cycle.	The crystal structures of horseradish peroxidase C (HRPC) active-site mutants H42E and R38S/H42E co-crystallized with benzhydroxamic acid (BHA) and ferulic acid (FA), respectively, have been solved. The 2.5 A crystal structure of the H42E-BHA complex reveals that the side-chain O atoms of Glu42 occupy positions that are very similar to the positions of the two side-chain N atoms of the distal histidine in the wild-type HRPC-BHA structure. The mutation disturbs the hydrogen-bonding network extending from residue 42 to the distal calcium ion and results in the absence of the water molecule that is usually ligated to this ion in plant peroxidases. Consequently, the distal calcium ion is six- rather than seven-coordinated. In the 2.0 A R38S/H42E structure the position of Glu42 is different and no FA is observed in the distal haem pocket. This is a consequence of the absence of the Arg38 side chain, which limits the flexibility of the Glu42 side chain and modulates its acidity, making it unsuitable as a general acid-base catalyst in the reaction cycle. The water ligated to the distal calcium ion is present, showing that the wild-type distal hydrogen-bonding network is preserved. These results show why a glutamic acid residue can substitute for the conserved distal histidine in HRPC and that Arg38 plays a significant role in controlling the positioning and ionization state of the residue at position 42. Furthermore, these structures indicate that changes in the distal cavity are conveyed through the distal hydrogen-bonding network to the distal calcium site.
10841779	Catalytic cysteine of thymidylate synthase is activated upon substrate binding.	The role of Ser 167 of Escherichia coli thymidylate synthase (TS) in catalysis has been characterized by kinetic and crystallographic studies. Position 167 variants including S167A, S167N, S167D, S167C, S167G, S167L, S167T, and S167V were generated by site-directed mutagenesis. Only S167A, S167G, S167T, and S167C complemented the growth of thymidine auxotrophs of E. coli in medium lacking thymidine. Steady-state kinetic analysis revealed that mutant enzymes exhibited k(cat) values 1.1-95-fold lower than that of the wild-type enzyme. Relative to wild-type TS, K(m) values of the mutant enzymes for 2'-deoxyuridylate (dUMP) were 5-90 times higher, while K(m) values for 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH(2)H(4)folate) were 1.5-16-fold higher. The rate of dehalogenation of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine 5'-monophosphate (BrdUMP), a reaction catalyzed by TS that does not require CH(2)H(4)folate as cosubstrate, by mutant TSs was analyzed and showed that only S167A and S167G catalyzed the dehalogenation reaction and values of k(cat)/K(m) for the mutant enzymes were decreased by 10- and 3000-fold, respectively. Analysis of pre-steady-state kinetics of ternary complex formation revealed that the productive binding of CH(2)H(4)folate is weaker to mutant TSs than to the wild-type enzyme. Chemical transformation constants (k(chem)) for the mutant enzymes were lower by 1.1-6.0-fold relative to the wild-type enzyme. S167A, S167T, and S167C crystallized in the I2(1)3 space group and scattered X-rays to either 1.7 A (S167A and S167T) or 2.6 A (S167C). The high-resolution data sets were refined to a R(crys) of 19.9%. In the crystals some cysteine residues were derivatized with 2-mercaptoethanol to form S,S-(2-hydroxyethyl)thiocysteine. The pattern of derivatization indicates that in the absence of bound substrate the catalytic cysteine is not more reactive than other cysteines. It is proposed that the catalytic cysteine is activated by substrate binding by a proton-transfer mechanism in which the phosphate group of the nucleotide neutralizes the charge of Arg 126', facilitating the transfer of a proton from the catalytic cysteine to a His 207-Asp 205 diad via a system of ordered water molecules.
12554939	Use of multiple anomalous dispersion to phase highly merohedrally twinned crystals of interleukin-1beta.	The crystal structure at 1.54 A resolution of a double mutant of interleukin-1beta (F42W/W120F), a cytokine secreted by macrophages, was determined by multiple-wavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) using data from highly twinned selenomethionine-modified crystals. The space group is P4(3), with unit-cell parameters a = b = 53.9, c = 77.4 A. Self-rotation function analysis and various intensity statistics revealed the presence of merohedral twinning in crystals of both the native (twinning fraction alpha approximately 0.35) and SeMet (alpha approximately 0.40) forms. Structure determination and refinement are discussed with emphasis on the possible reasons for successful phasing using untreated twinned MAD data.
7607478	Crystal structure of the PvuII restriction endonuclease.	Crystal structures have now been determined for the R.PvuII restriction endonuclease as a protein-DNA complex [Cheng et al., EMBO J. 13 (1994) 3927-3935; this report] and in apo-form [Athanasiadis et al., Nature Struc. Biol. 1 (1994) 469-475; our unpublished result]. The structures indicate how the interaction with DNA might proceed [Riddihough, Nature 370 (1994) 78].
2033075	Molecular cloning of matrin 3. A 125-kilodalton protein of the nuclear matrix contains an extensive acidic domain.	We report here the cloning and sequencing of matrin 3, an acidic internal matrix protein, from a rat insuloma cDNA library. The nucleotide sequence has a single open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 845 amino acids. The Genbank and National Biomedical Research Foundation databases did not contain any sequences similar to that of matrin 3. The primary structure consists of 33% charged residues and is generally hydrophilic. The amino-terminal region (residues 1-120) is positively charged and contains a large number of amino acids with free hydroxyl groups (26 of the first 100 residues) as in the lamins and several non-lamin intermediate filament proteins. A highly acidic domain (approximately 170 amino acids) near the carboxyl terminus, in which 32% of the amino acid residues are acidic (Glu or Asp), is a characteristic found in other nuclear proteins (Earnshaw, W. C. (1987) J. Cell Biol. 105, 1479-1482). A putative nuclear targeting signal sequence (Ser-Lys-Lys-Lys-Leu-Lys-Lys-Val-Glu) is located in the middle of the highly acidic domain. The corresponding human deduced partial amino acid sequence is 96% identical to the rat sequence, indicating that matrin 3 is a highly conserved protein.
9346243	Structure of the substrate binding domain of the thermosome, an archaeal group II chaperonin.	The crystal structure of the substrate binding domain of the thermosome, the archaeal group II chaperonin, has been determined at 2.3 A resolution. The core resembles the apical domain of GroEL but lacks the hydrophobic residues implied in binding of substrates to group I chaperonins. Rather, a large hydrophobic surface patch is found in a novel helix-turn-helix motif, which is characteristic of all group II chaperonins including the eukaryotic TRiC/CCT complex. Models of the holochaperonin, which are consistent with cryo electron microscopy data, suggest a dual role of this helical protrusion in substrate binding and controlling access to the central cavity independent of a GroES-like cochaperonin.
1752442	Efficient association of U2 snRNPs with pre-mRNA requires an essential U2 RNA structural element.	To understand the role of U2 RNA structure in pre-mRNA splicing we have characterized several cold-sensitive mutations in an essential stem-loop of yeast U2. Although mutant U2 is stable in vivo after a shift to restrictive temperature, splicing is rapidly inhibited, suggesting a direct effect on U2 function rather than U2 synthesis or snRNP assembly. Splicing complexes form at 23 degrees C in both mutant and wild-type extracts; however, stable association of mutant U2 snRNPs with pre-mRNA in vitro is inefficient at 15 degrees C, a temperature permissive for spliceosome assembly in wild-type extracts, indicating that the cold-sensitive defect is in U2 snRNP association with the assembling spliceosome. In vivo RNA structure probing reveals that the bulk of U2 RNA is misfolded in the mutants, even at permissive temperature. We propose that U2 stem-loop IIa is recognized by an assembly factor that assists U2 snRNP binding to pre-mRNA and that the cold sensitivity is due to a critical deficiency of correctly folded U2 for spliceosome assembly at low temperatures. Evolutionary conservation of the potential to form an interfering alternative RNA structure suggests the possibility that splicing could be regulated negatively at an early step by control of U2 snRNA conformation.
11148029	Strain is more important than electrostatic interaction in controlling the pKa of the catalytic group in aspartate aminotransferase.	Systematic single and multiple replacement studies have been applied to Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase to probe the electrostatic effect of the two substrate-binding arginine residues, Arg292 and Arg386, and the structural effect of the pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-Asn194-Arg386 hydrogen-bond linkage system (PLP-N-R) on the pK(a) value of the Schiff base formed between pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) and Lys258. The electrostatic effects of the two arginine residues cannot be assessed by simple mutational studies of the residues. PLP-N-R lowers the pK(a) value of the PLP-Lys258 Schiff base by keeping it in the distorted conformation, which is unfavorable for protonation. Mutation of Arg386 eliminates its hydrogen bond with Asn194 and partially disrupts PLP-N-R, thereby relaxing the strain of the Schiff base. On the other hand, mutation of Arg292, the large domain residue that interacts with the small domain residue Asp15, makes the domain opening easier. Because PLP-N-R lies between the two domains, the domain opening increases the strain of the Schiff base. Therefore, the true electrostatic effects of Arg292 and Arg386 could be derived from mutational analysis of the enzyme in which PLP-N-R had been completely disrupted by the Asn194Ala mutation. Through the analyses, we could dissect the electrostatic and structural effects of the arginine mutations on the Schiff base pK(a). The positive charges of the two arginine residues and the PLP-N-R-mediated strain of the Schiff base lower the Schiff base pK(a) by 0.7 and 1.7, respectively. Thus, the electrostatic effect of the arginine residues is not as strong as has historically been thought, and this finding substantiates our recent finding that the imine-pyridine torsion of the Schiff base is the primary determinant (2.8 unit decrease) of the extremely low pK(a) value of the Schiff base [Hayashi, H., Mizuguchi, H., and Kagamiyama, H. (1998) Biochemistry 37, 15076-15085].
1631098	Structures of apo and complexed Escherichia coli glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase.	The three-dimensional structure of phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase (10-formyltetrahydrofolate:5'-phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase, EC 2.1.2.2) has been solved both as an apoenzyme at 2.8-A resolution and as a ternary complex with the substrate glycinamide ribonucleotide and a folate inhibitor at 2.5-A resolution. The structure is a modified doubly wound alpha/beta sheet with flexibility in the active site, including a disordered loop in the apo structure, which is ordered in the ternary complex structure. This enzyme is a target for anti-cancer therapy and now for structure-based drug design.
9687370	Crystal structure of the C2 domain from protein kinase C-delta.	BACKGROUND: The protein kinase C (PKC) family of lipid-dependent serine/theonine kinases plays a central role in many intracellular eukaryotic signalling events. Members of the novel (delta, epsilon, eta, theta) subclass of PKC isotypes lack the Ca2+ dependence of the conventional PKC isotypes and have an N-terminal C2 domain, originally defined as V0 (variable domain zero). Biochemical data suggest that this domain serves to translocate novel PKC family members to the plasma membrane and may influence binding of PKC activators. RESULTS: The crystal structure of PKC-delta C2 domain indicates an unusual variant of the C2 fold. Structural elements unique to this C2 domain include a helix and a protruding beta hairpin which may contribute basic sequences to a membrane-interaction site. The invariant C2 motif, Pro-X-Trp, where X is any amino acid, forms a short crossover loop, departing radically from its conformation in other C2 structures, and contains a tyrosine phosphorylation site unique to PKC-delta. This loop and two others adopt quite different conformations from the equivalent Ca(2+)-binding loops of phospholipase C-delta and synaptotagmin I, and lack sequences necessary for Ca2+ coordination. CONCLUSIONS: The N-terminal sequence of Ca(2+)-independent novel PKCs defines a divergent example of a C2 structure similar to that of phospholipase C-delta. The Ca(2+)-independent regulation of novel PKCs is explained by major structural and sequence differences resulting in three non-functional Ca(2+)-binding loops. The observed structural variation and position of a tyrosine-phosphorylation site suggest the existence of distinct subclasses of C2-like domains which may have evolved distinct functional roles and mechanisms to interact with lipid membranes.
10653632	Dissection of malonyl-coenzyme A decarboxylation from polyketide formation in the reaction mechanism of a plant polyketide synthase.	Chalcone synthase (CHS) catalyzes formation of the phenylpropanoid chalcone from one p-coumaroyl-CoA and three malonyl-coenzyme A (CoA) thioesters. The three-dimensional structure of CHS [Ferrer, J.-L., Jez, J. M., Bowman, M. E., Dixon, R. A., and Noel, J. P. (1999) Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 775-784] suggests that four residues (Cys164, Phe215, His303, and Asn336) participate in the multiple decarboxylation and condensation reactions catalyzed by this enzyme. Here, we functionally characterize 16 point mutants of these residues for chalcone production, malonyl-CoA decarboxylation, and the ability to bind CoA and acetyl-CoA. Our results confirm Cys164's role as the active-site nucleophile in polyketide formation and elucidate the importance of His303 and Asn336 in the malonyl-CoA decarboxylation reaction. We suggest that Phe215 may help orient substrates at the active site during elongation of the polyketide intermediate. To better understand the structure-function relationships in some of these mutants, we also determined the crystal structures of the CHS C164A, H303Q, and N336A mutants refined to 1.69, 2.0, and 2.15 A resolution, respectively. The structure of the C164A mutant reveals that the proposed oxyanion hole formed by His303 and Asn336 remains undisturbed, allowing this mutant to catalyze malonyl-CoA decarboxylation without chalcone formation. The structures of the H303Q and N336A mutants support the importance of His303 and Asn336 in polarizing the thioester carbonyl of malonyl-CoA during the decarboxylation reaction. In addition, both of these residues may also participate in stabilizing the tetrahedral transition state during polyketide elongation. Conservation of the catalytic functions of the active-site residues may occur across a wide variety of condensing enzymes, including other polyketide and fatty acid synthases.
9446593	The solution structure and dynamics of the pleckstrin homology domain of G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 1). A binding partner of Gbetagamma subunits.	The solution structure of an extended pleckstrin homology (PH) domain from the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase is obtained by high resolution NMR. The structure establishes that the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase extended PH domain has the same fold and topology as other PH domains, and there are several unique features, most notably an extended C-terminal alpha-helix that behaves as a molten helix, and a surface charge polarity that is extensively modified by positive residues in the extended alpha-helix and the C terminus. These observations complement biochemical evidence that the C-terminal portion of this PH domain participates in protein-protein interactions with Gbetagamma subunits. This suggests that the C-terminal segment of the PH domain may function to mediate protein-protein interactions with the targets of PH domains.
8648598	Complexes of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase with inhibitors of the HEPT series reveal conformational changes relevant to the design of potent non-nucleoside inhibitors.	Crystal structures of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) complexed with a range of chemically diverse non-nucleoside inhibitors (NNIs) have shown a single pocket in which the inhibitors bind and details of the inhibitor-protein interactions. To delineate the structural requirements for an effective inhibitor, we have determined the structures of three closely related NNIs which vary widely in their potencies. Crystal structures of HIV-1 RT complexed with two very potent inhibitors, MKC-442 and TNK-651, at 2.55 angstroms resolution complement our previous analysis of the complex with the less effective inhibitor, HEPT. These structures reveal conformational changes which correlate with changes in potency. We suggest that a major determinant of increased potency in the analogues of HEPT is an improved interaction between residue Tyr181 in the protein and the 6-benzyl ring of the inhibitors which stabilizes the structure of the complex. This arises through a conformational switching of the protein structure triggered by the steric bulk of the 5-substituent of the inhibitor pyrimidine ring.
2148648	Stable, monomeric variants of lambda Cro obtained by insertion of a designed beta-hairpin sequence.	lambda Cro is a dimeric DNA binding protein. Random mutagenesis and a selection for Cro activity have been used to identify the contacts between Cro subunits that are crucial for maintenance of a stably folded structure. To obtain equivalent contacts in a monomeric system, a Cro variant was designed and constructed in which the antiparallel beta-ribbon that forms the dimer interface was replaced by a beta-hairpin. The engineered monomer has a folded structure similar to wild type, is significantly more stable than wild type, and exhibits novel half-operator binding activity.
8736558	The solution structure of human thioredoxin complexed with its target from Ref-1 reveals peptide chain reversal.	BACKGROUND: Human thioredoxin (hTRX) is a 12 kDa cellular redox protein that has been shown to play an important role in the activation of a number of transcriptional and translational regulators via a thiol-redox mechanism. This activity may be direct or indirect via another redox protein known as Ref-1. The structure of a complex of hTRX with a peptide comprising its target from the transcription factor NF kappa B has previously been solved. To further extend our knowledge of the recognition by and interaction of hTRX with its various targets, we have studied a complex between hTRX and a Ref-1 peptide. This complex represents a kinetically stable mixed disulfide intermediate along the reaction pathway. RESULTS: Using multidimensional heteronuclear edited and filtered NMR spectroscopy, we have solved the solution structure of a complex between hTRX and a 13-residue peptide comprising residues 59-71 of Ref-1. The Ref-1 peptide is located in a crescent-shaped groove on the surface of hTRX, the groove being formed by residues in the active-site loop (residues 32-36), helix 3, beta strands 3 and 5, and the loop between beta strands 3 and 4. The complex is stabilized by numerous hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic interactions that involve residues 61-69 of the peptide and confer substrate specificity. CONCLUSIONS: The orientation of the Ref-1 peptide in the hTRX-Ref-1 complex is opposite to that found in the previously solved complex of hTRX with the target peptide from the transcription factor NF kappa B. Orientation is determined by three discriminating interactions involving the nature of the residues at the P-2' P-4 and P-5 binding positions. (P0 defines the active cysteine of the peptide, Cys65 for Ref-1 and Cys62 for NF kappa B. Positive and negative numbers indicate residues N-terminal and C-terminal to this residue, respectively, and vice versa for NF kappa B as it binds in the opposite orientation.) The environment surrounding the reactive Cys32 of hTRX, as well as the packing of the P+3 to P-4 residues are essentially the same in the two complexes, despite the opposing orientation of the peptide chains. This versatility in substrate recognition permits hTRX to act as a wide-ranging redox regulator for the cell.
8392729	Structure determination of feline panleukopenia virus empty particles.	Various crystal forms of the single-stranded DNA, feline panleukopenia virus (FPV), a parvovirus, have been grown of both full virions and empty particles. The structure of empty particles crystallized in an orthorhombic space group P2(1)2(1)2(1), with unit cell dimensions a = 380.1 A, b = 379.3 A, and c = 350.9 A, has been determined to 3.3 A resolution. The data were collected using oscillation photography with synchrotron radiation. The orientations of the empty capsids in the unit cell were determined using a self-rotation function and their positions were obtained with an R-factor search using canine parvovirus (CPV) as a model. Phases were then calculated, based on the CPV model, to 6.0 A resolution and gradually extended to 3.3 A resolution by molecular replacement electron density averaging. The resultant electron density was readily interpreted in terms of the known amino acid sequence. The structure is contrasted to that of CPV in terms of host range, neutralization by antibodies, hemagglutination properties, and binding of genomic DNA.
11031266	Structures of prolyl oligopeptidase substrate/inhibitor complexes. Use of inhibitor binding for titration of the catalytic histidine residue.	Structure determination of the inactive S554A variant of prolyl oligopeptidase complexed with an octapeptide has shown that substrate binding is restricted to the P4-P2' region. In addition, it has revealed a hydrogen bond network of potential catalytic importance not detected in other serine peptidases. This involves a unique intramolecular hydrogen bond between the P1' amide and P2 carbonyl groups and another between the P2' amide and Nepsilon2 of the catalytic histidine 680 residue. It is argued that both hydrogen bonds promote proton transfer from the imidazolium ion to the leaving group. Another complex formed with the product-like inhibitor benzyloxycarbonyl-glycyl-proline, indicating that the carboxyl group of the inhibitor forms a hydrogen bond with the Nepsilon2 of His(680). Because a protonated histidine makes a stronger interaction with the carboxyl group, it offers a possibility of the determination of the real pK(a) of the catalytic histidine residue. This was found to be 6.25, lower than that of the well studied serine proteases. The new titration method gave a single pK(a) for prolyl oligopeptidase, whose reaction exhibited a complex pH dependence for k(cat)/K(m), and indicated that the observed pK(a) values are apparent. The procedure presented may be applicable for other serine peptidases.
11069910	Roles of active site and novel K+ ion-binding site residues in human mitochondrial branched-chain alpha-ketoacid decarboxylase/dehydrogenase.	The human mitochondrial branched-chain alpha-ketoacid decarboxylase/dehydrogenase (BCKD) is a heterotetrameric (alpha(2)beta(2)) thiamine diphosphate (TDP)-dependent enzyme. The recently solved human BCKD structure at 2.7 A showed that the two TDP-binding pockets are located at the interfaces between alpha and beta' subunits and between alpha' and beta subunits. In the present study, we show that the E76A-beta' mutation results in complete inactivation of BCKD. The result supports the catalytic role of the invariant Glu-76-beta' residue in increasing basicity of the N-4' amino group during the proton abstraction from the C-2 atom on the thiazolium ring. A substitution of His-146-beta' with Ala also renders the enzyme completely inactive. The data are consistent with binding of the alpha-ketoacid substrate by this residue based on the Pseudomonas BCKD structure. Alterations in Asn-222-alpha, Tyr-224-alpha, or Glu-193-alpha, which coordinates to the Mg(2+) ion, result in an inactive enzyme (E193A-alpha) or a mutant BCKD with markedly higher K(m) for TDP and a reduced level of the bound cofactor (Y224A-alpha and N222S-alpha). Arg-114-alpha, Arg-220-alpha, and His-291-alpha interact with TDP by directly binding to phosphate oxygens of the cofactor. We show that natural mutations of these residues in maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) patients (R114W-alpha and R220W-alpha) or site-directed mutagenesis (H291A-alpha) also result in an inactive or partially active enzyme, respectively. Another MSUD mutation (T166M-alpha), which affects one of the residues that coordinate to the K(+) ion on the alpha subunit, also causes inactivation of the enzyme and an attenuated ability to bind TDP. In addition, fluorescence measurements establish that Trp-136-beta in human BCKD is the residue quenched by TDP binding. Thus, our results define the functional roles of key amino acid residues in human BCKD and provide a structural basis for MSUD.
7687065	Crystal structure of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase complexed with double-stranded DNA at 3.0 A resolution shows bent DNA.	The crystal structure of a ternary complex of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase (HIV-1 RT) heterodimer (p66/p51), a 19-base/18-base double-stranded DNA template-primer, and a monoclonal antibody Fab fragment has been determined at 3.0 A resolution. The four individual subdomains of RT that make up the polymerase domains of p66 and p51 are named fingers, palm, thumb, and connection [Kohlstaedt, L. A., Wang, J., Friedman, J. M., Rice, P. A. & Steitz, T. A. (1992) Science 256, 1783-1790]. The overall folding of the subdomains is similar in p66 and p51 but the spatial arrangements of the subdomains are dramatically different. The template-primer has A-form and B-form regions separated by a significant bend (40-45 degrees). The most numerous nucleic acid interactions with protein occur primarily along the sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA and involve amino acid residues of the palm, thumb, and fingers of p66. Highly conserved regions are located in the p66 palm near the polymerase active site. These structural elements, together with two alpha-helices of the thumb of p66, act as a clamp to position the template-primer relative to the polymerase active site. The 3'-hydroxyl of the primer terminus is close to the catalytically essential Asp-110, Asp-185, and Asp-186 residues at the active site and is in a position for nucleophilic attack on the alpha-phosphate of an incoming nucleoside triphosphate. The structure of the HIV-1 RT/DNA/Fab complex should aid our understanding of general mechanisms of nucleic acid polymerization. AIDS therapies may be enhanced by a fuller understanding of drug inhibition and resistance emerging from these studies.
7776369	Towards structure-based drug design: crystal structure of a multisubstrate adduct complex of glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase at 1.96 A resolution.	An inhibitor complex structure of glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase (GAR-Tfase; EC 2.1.2.2) from Escherichia coli has been determined with a multisubstrate adduct BW1476U89 to an R-value of 19.1% at 1.96 A resolution. The structure was determined by a combination of molecular and single isomorphous replacement using data from two different monoclinic crystal lattices and collecting data from crystals soaked in 20% (w/v) methyl-pentanediol as cryoprotectant for shock-freezing at -150 degrees C. The multisubstrate adduct is bound in an extended crevice at the interface between the two functional domains of the enzyme. This inhibitor is positioned in the binding site by three sets of tight interactions with its phosphate, glutamate and pyrimidone ring moieties, while its interventing linker atoms are more flexible and adopt two distinct sets of conformations. The highly conserved Arg103, His108 and Gln170 residues that are key in ligand binding and catalysis (His108), have compensatory conformational variation that gives some clues as to their role in substrate specificity and in the formyl transfer. The molecular design of 1476U89 as a multisubstrate adduct inhibitor (Ki approximately 100 pM at pH 8.5), is confirmed as it closely mimics the shape, molecular interaction and combined binding constants of the natural 10-formyltetrahydrofolate (10-CHO-H4F; Km approximately 77.4 microM at pH 8.5) and glycinamide-ribonucleotide (GAR; Km approximately 8.1 microM at pH 8.5) substrates. The stereochemistry of this ligand complex suggests that His108 may act as an electrophile stabilizing the oxyanion of the tetrahedral intermediate that is formed as a result of the direct attack on the 10-CHO-H4F by the amino group of GAR. Structural comparison of the folate binding modes among GAR-Tfase, dihydrofolate reductase and thymidylate synthase reveals that folate derivates bound to GAR-Tfase differentially adopt the trans conformation for the dihedral angle between atoms C-6 and C-9 providing a handle for targeting specific folate-dependent enzymes. The structural information derived from two different discrete conformations of the ligand in the binding site also suggests several leads for the de novo design of inhibitors of GAR-Tfase that may develop into useful chemotherapeutic agents.
8987980	Elimination of the hydrolytic water molecule in a class A beta-lactamase mutant: crystal structure and kinetics.	Two site-directed mutant enzymes of the class A beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 were produced with the goal of blocking the site that in the native enzyme is occupied by the proposed hydrolytic water molecule. The crystal structures of these two mutant enzymes, N170Q and N170M, have been determined and refined at 2.2 and 2.0 A, respectively. They reveal that the side chain of Gln 170 displaces the water molecule, whereas that of Met170 does not. In both cases, the catalytic rates with benzylpenicillin are reduced by 10(4) compared with the native enzyme. With nitrocefin, the N170Q mutant enzyme exhibits an approximately 800-fold reduced rate compared with the native enzyme and in addition, a fast initial burst with stoichiometry of 1 mol of degraded nitrocefin/mol of enzyme. Stopped-flow kinetic experiments establish that the rate constant of the burst is 250 s-1, a value comparable with the rate of acylation of the native enzyme. Two structurally based mechanisms that explain the kinetic properties of the N170Q beta-lactamase are proposed, both invoking a deacylation-impaired enzyme due to the elimination of the hydrolytic water molecule. The catalytic rate of the N170M mutant enzyme with nitrocefin is reduced by approximately 50-fold compared with the native enzyme, and the slow progressive inhibition that is revealed indicates that the hydrolysis proceeds via a branched pathway mechanism. This is consistent with the structural data that show that the water site is preserved and that Met170 occupies part of the space that is required for substrate binding. The short contacts between the substrate and the enzyme may lead to structure perturbation and inactivation.
599565	Structure of the semiquinone form of flavodoxin from Clostridum MP. Extension of 1.8 A resolution and some comparisons with the oxidized state.	null
15522303	Dissecting and designing inhibitor selectivity determinants at the S1 site using an artificial Ala190 protease (Ala190 uPA).	A site-directed mutant of the serine protease urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA), was produced to assess the contribution of the Ser190 side-chain to the affinity and selectivity of lead uPA inhibitors in the absence of other differences present in comparisons of natural proteases. Crystallography and enzymology involving WT and Ala190 uPA were used to calculate free energy binding contributions of hydrogen bonds involving the Ser190 hydroxyl group (O(gamma)(Ser190)) responsible for the remarkable selectivity of 6-halo-5-amidinoindole and 6-halo-5-amidinobenzimidazole inhibitors toward uPA and against natural Ala190 protease anti-targets. Crystal structures of uPA complexes of novel, active site-directed arylguanidine and 2-aminobenzimidazole inhibitors of WT uPA, together with associated K(i) values for WT and Ala190 uPA, also indicate a significant role of Ser190 in the binding of these classes of uPA inhibitors. Structures and associated K(i) values for a lead inhibitor (CA-11) bound to uPA and to five other proteases, as well as for other leads bound to multiple proteases, help reveal the features responsible for the potency (K(i)=11nM) and selectivity of the remarkably small inhibitor, CA-11. The 6-fluoro-5-amidinobenzimidzole, CA-11, is more than 1000-fold selective against natural Ala190 protease anti-targets, and more than 100-fold selective against other Ser190 anti-targets.
16288913	Asp79 makes a large, unfavorable contribution to the stability of RNase Sa.	The two most buried carboxyl groups in ribonuclease Sa (RNase Sa) are Asp33 (99% buried; pK 2.4) and Asp79 (85% buried; pK 7.4). Above these pK values, the stability of the D33A variant is 6kcal/mol less than wild-type RNase Sa, and the stability of the D79A variant is 3.3kcal/mol greater than wild-type RNase Sa. The key structural difference between the carboxyl groups is that Asp33 forms three intramolecular hydrogen bonds, and Asp79 forms no intramolecular hydrogen bond. Here, we focus on Asp79 and describe studies of 11 Asp79 variants. Most of the variants were at least 2kcal/mol more stable than wild-type RNase Sa, and the most interesting was D79F. At pH 3, below the pK of Asp79, RNase Sa is 0.3kcal/mol more stable than the D79F variant. At pH 8.5, above the pK of Asp79, RNase Sa is 3.7kcal/mol less stable than the D79F variant. The unfavorable contribution of Asp79 to the stability appears to result from the Born self-energy of burying the charge and, more importantly, from unfavorable charge-charge interactions. To counteract the effect of the negative charge on Asp79, we prepared the Q94K variant and the crystal structure showed that the amino group of the Lys formed a hydrogen-bonded ion pair (distance, 2.71A; angle, 100 degrees ) with the carboxyl group of Asp79. The stability of the Q94K variant was about the same as the wild-type at pH 3, where Asp79 is uncharged, but 1kcal/mol greater than that of wild-type RNase Sa at pH 8.5, where Asp79 is charged. Differences in hydrophobicity, steric strain, Born self-energy, and electrostatic interactions all appear to contribute to the range of stabilities observed in the variants. When it is possible, replacing buried, non-hydrogen bonded, ionizable side-chains with non-polar side-chains is an excellent means of increasing protein stability.
9558361	Chemical rescue of Klebsiella aerogenes urease variants lacking the carbamylated-lysine nickel ligand.	Klebsiella aerogenes urease possesses a dinuclear metallocenter in which two nickel atoms are bridged by carbamylated Lys217. To assess whether carbamate-specific chemistry is required for urease activity, site-directed mutagenesis and chemical rescue strategies were combined in efforts to place a carboxylate group at the location of this metal ligand. Urease variants with Lys217 replaced by Glu, Cys, and Ala (K217E, K217C/C319A, and K217A proteins) were purified, shown to be activated by incubation with small organic acids plus Ni(II), and structurally characterized. K217C/C319A urease possessed a second change in which Cys319 was replaced by Ala in order to facilitate efforts to chemically modify Cys217; however, this covalent modification approach did not produce active urease. Chemical rescue of the K217E, K217C/C319A, and K217A variants required 2, 2, and 10 h, respectively, to reach maximal activity levels. The highest activity generated [224 micromol of urea degraded.min-1.(mg of protein)-1, for K217C/C319A urease incubated with 500 mM formic acid and 10 mM Ni at pH 6.5] corresponded to 56% of that measured for in vitro activation of the wild-type apoprotein. While the K217E apoprotein showed minimal structural perturbations, the K217C/C319A apoprotein showed a disordering of some active site residues, and the K217A apoprotein revealed a repositioning of His219 to allow the formation of a hydrogen bond with Thr169, thus replacing the hydrogen bond between the amino group of Lys217 and Thr169 in the native enzyme. Importantly, these structures allow rationalization of the relative rates and yields of chemical rescue experiments. The crystal structures of chemically rescued K217A and K217C/C319A ureases revealed a return of the active site residues to their wild-type positions. In both cases, noncovalently bound formate was structurally equivalent to the Lys-carbamate as the bridging metallocenter ligand. We conclude that carbamate-specific chemistry is not required for urease catalysis.
10764577	Structure of the CAD domain of caspase-activated DNase and interaction with the CAD domain of its inhibitor.	Caspase-activated DNase (CAD), which causes a genome fragmentation at the final stage of apoptosis, is a protein of about 40 kDa and exists as a complex form with the inhibitor ICAD in living cells. There is sequence homology of about 80 amino acid residues at the N termini of CAD and ICAD (called the CAD domain). Here, we report the three-dimensional structure of the CAD domain of CAD determined by multi-dimensional NMR spectroscopy and the property of CAD domains investigated by a surface plasmon resonance experiment. The CAD domain of CAD is an independently folded domain composed of one alpha-helix and five beta-strands forming a single sheet. The overall structure is categorized in the ubiquitin superfold. This domain can bind strongly to the isolated CAD domain of ICAD (dissociation constant: 5.48(+/-0.003)x10(-8) M). It suggests the function of the CAD domains in the CAD-ICAD system, that the protein-protein interaction through the CAD domains plays an important role in the inhibition of CAD DNase activity and in the correct folding of CAD. On the basis of structural comparison with other protein complexes containing the ubiquitin superfold, the interaction mode of the CAD domains is proposed.
8206995	A nicotinic acetylcholine receptor ligand of unique specificity, alpha-conotoxin ImI.	We report the isolation, characterization, and total synthesis of a small peptide ligand for nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). It is highly active against the neuromuscular receptor in frog but not in mice. In contrast, it induces seizures when injected centrally in mice and rats, suggesting that it may target neuronal nAChRs in mammals. Although such receptors may be important in both normal cognition and the pathophysiology of several neuropsychiatric disorders, there are few ligands to discriminate between the multiple receptor subtypes. The new peptide is a highly divergent alpha-conotoxin from the snail Conus imperialis, which preys on polychaete worms. In this article, the purification, structural analysis, synthesis, and preliminary physiological characterization of alpha-conotoxin ImI (alpha-CTx-ImI) are reported. The sequence of the peptide is: Gly-Cys-Cys-Ser-Asp-Pro-Arg-Cys-Ala-Trp-Arg-Cys-NH2. The peptide shows striking sequence differences from all alpha-conotoxins of fish-hunting Conus, but its disulfide-bridging is similar: [2-8; 3-12]. We suggest that cone venoms may provide an array of ligands with selectivity for various neuronal nAChR subtypes.
488354	The C-terminal fragment of human glutathione reductase contains the postulated catalytic histidine.	null
8706698	A site-directed mutagenesis study of Saccharomyces cerevisiae pyrophosphatase. Functional conservation of the active site of soluble inorganic pyrophosphatases.	We report the expression and initial characterization of 19 active-site variants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae inorganic pyrophosphatase (PPase), including measurements of thermostability, oligomeric structure and specific activity at pH 7.2. 13 of the 19 conservative substitutions resulted in at least a fivefold decrease in activity, indicating that these residues are important for yeast PPase catalysis. The E58D, D117E, D120E and D152E variants had no activity under the conditions tested, suggesting that Glu58, Asp117, Asp120 and Asp152 may have crucial roles in catalysis. The effects of the mutations on catalytic activity were very similar to those observed with the corresponding variants of Escherichia coli PPase, proving conclusively that the active site and mechanism of soluble PPases are conserved. The D71E variant was more thermostable and the K56R, R78K, D115E and K154R variants were more thermolabile than the wild-type enzyme, whereas subunit:subunit interactions were somewhat weakened by the K56R, R78K, Y89F and K154R substitutions. These results suggest that Lys56, Asp71, Arg78, Tyr89, Asp115 and Lys154 are structurally important for yeast PPase.
15684414	The crystal structure of the outer membrane protein VceC from the bacterial pathogen Vibrio cholerae at 1.8 A resolution.	Multidrug resistance in Gram-negative bacteria arises in part from the activities of tripartite drug efflux pumps. In the pathogen Vibrio cholerae, one such pump comprises the inner membrane proton antiporter VceB, the periplasmic adaptor VceA, and the outer membrane channel VceC. Here, we report the crystal structure of VceC at 1.8 A resolution. The trimeric VceC is organized in the crystal lattice within laminar arrays that resemble membranes. A well resolved detergent molecule within this array interacts with the transmembrane beta-barrel domain in a fashion that may mimic protein-lipopolysaccharide contacts. Our analyses of the external surfaces of VceC and other channel proteins suggest that different classes of efflux pumps have distinct architectures. We discuss the implications of these findings for mechanisms of drug and protein export.
11689936	Chemistry of ion coordination and hydration revealed by a K+ channel-Fab complex at 2.0 A resolution.	Ion transport proteins must remove an ion's hydration shell to coordinate the ion selectively on the basis of its size and charge. To discover how the K+ channel solves this fundamental aspect of ion conduction, we solved the structure of the KcsA K+ channel in complex with a monoclonal Fab antibody fragment at 2.0 A resolution. Here we show how the K+ channel displaces water molecules around an ion at its extracellular entryway, and how it holds a K+ ion in a square antiprism of water molecules in a cavity near its intracellular entryway. Carbonyl oxygen atoms within the selectivity filter form a very similar square antiprism around each K+ binding site, as if to mimic the waters of hydration. The selectivity filter changes its ion coordination structure in low K+ solutions. This structural change is crucial to the operation of the selectivity filter in the cellular context, where the K+ ion concentration near the selectivity filter varies in response to channel gating.
2909547	A 2.0-A structure of the blue copper protein (cupredoxin) from Alcaligenes faecalis S-6.	The structure of a blue copper protein, cupredoxin, from the potent denitrifying bacterium Alcaligenes faecalis S-6, has been determined and refined against 2 A x-ray diffraction data. The agreement between observed and calculated structure factors is 0.159, and estimated errors in coordinates are 0.09-0.15 A. The protein folds in a beta sandwich similar to plastocyanin and azurin and includes features such as a "kink" and a "tyrosine loop" which have been noted previously for these proteins as well as immunoglobulins. The copper is bound by four ligands, in a distorted tetrahedral arrangement, with Cu-S gamma = 2.07 A (Cys-78), Cu-N delta 1 = 2.10 and 2.21 for His-40 and His-81, and Cu-S delta = 2.69 A (Met-86). Two of the ligands are further oriented by hydrogen bonds either to other side chains (Asn-9 to His-40), backbone atoms (NH...S) or a water molecule (to His-40). The methionine ligand has no extra constraints. The C-terminal loop containing three of the ligands is hydrogen-bonded to the strand containing His-40 by hydrogen bonds between the conserved residues Thr-79 and Asn-41. The pronounced dichroism of the crystal is a result of the orientation of the normal to the C beta-S gamma-Cu plane parallel to the crystallographic 6-fold axis.
12079386	The structure of an allosamidin complex with the Coccidioides immitis chitinase defines a role for a second acid residue in substrate-assisted mechanism.	Allosamidin is a known inhibitor of class 18 chitinases. We show that allosamidin is a competitive inhibitor of the fungal chitinase CiX1 from Coccidioides immitis, with a K(i) of 60 nM. We report the X-ray structure of the complex and show that upon inhibitor binding the side-chain of Asp169 rotates to form an ion pair with the oxazolinium cation. The mechanism of action is thought to involve protonation of the leaving group by Glu171 and substrate assistance by the sugar acetamido moiety to form an oxazoline-like intermediate. We converted both amino acid residues to the corresponding amide and found that each mutation effectively abolishes enzyme activity. X-ray structures show the mutant enzymes retain the basic wild-type structure and that the loss of mutant activity is due to their altered chemical properties. The high affinity of allosamidin, and its similarity to the putative reaction intermediate, suggests it is a transition state analog. This helps validate our contention that the role of Asp169 is to electrostatically stabilize the reaction transition state.
12927546	Three dimensional structures of S189D chymotrypsin and D189S trypsin mutants: the effect of polarity at site 189 on a protease-specific stabilization of the substrate-binding site.	The crystal structure of S189D rat chymotrypsin have been determined (resolution 2.55A) and compared, together with D189S rat trypsin to wild-type structures to examine why these single mutations resulted in poorly active, non-specific enzymes instead of converting the specificities of trypsin and chymotrypsin into each other. Both mutants have stable structure but suffer from a surprisingly large number of serious deformations. These are restricted to the activation domain, mainly to the substrate-binding region and are larger in S189D chymotrypsin. A wild-type substrate-binding mode in the mutants is disfavored by substantial displacements of the Cys191-Cys220 disulfide and loop segments 185-195 (loop C2/D2) and 217-224 (loop E2/F2) at the specificity site. As a consequence, the substrate-binding clefts become wider and more solvent-accessible in the middle third and occluded in the lower third. Interestingly, while the Ser189 residue in D189S trypsin adopts a chymotrypsin-like conformation, the Asp189 residue in S189D chymotrypsin is turned out toward the solvent. The rearrangements in D189S trypsin are at the same sites where trypsin and trypsinogen differ and, in S189D chymotrypsin, the oxyanion hole as well as the salt-bridge between Asp194 and the N-terminal of Ile16 are missing as in chymotrypsinogen. Despite these similarities, the mutants do not have zymogen conformation. The Ser189Asp and Asp189Ser substitutions are structurally so disruptive probably because the stabilization of such a different specificity site polarities as those after the removal or introduction of a charged residue are beyond the capability of the wild-type conformation of the substrate-binding region.
15828847	Potent and selective Aurora inhibitors identified by the expansion of a novel scaffold for protein kinase inhibition.	Potent and selective Aurora kinase inhibitors were identified from the combinatorial expansion of the 1,4,5,6-tetrahydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrazole bi-cycle, a novel and versatile scaffold designed to target the ATP pocket of protein kinases. The most potent compound reported in this study had an IC(50) of 0.027 microM in the enzymatic assay for Aur-A inhibition and IC(50)s between 0.05 microM and 0.5 microM for the inhibition of proliferation of different tumor cell lines.
14978308	Lead optimization of antifungal peptides with 3D NMR structures analysis.	Antimicrobial peptides are key components of the innate immune response in most multicellular organisms. These molecules are considered as one of the most innovative class of anti-infective agents that have been discovered over the last two decades, and therefore, as a source of inspiration for novel drug design. Insect cystine-rich antimicrobial peptides with the CS alpha beta scaffold (an alpha-helix linked to a beta-sheet by two disulfide bridges) represent particularly attractive templates for the development of systemic agents owing to their remarkable resistance to protease degradation. We have selected heliomicin, a broad spectrum antifungal CS alpha beta peptide from Lepidoptera as the starting point of a lead optimization program based on phylogenic exploration and fine tuned mutagenesis. We report here the characterization, biological activity, and 3D structure of heliomicin improved analogs, namely the peptides ARD1, ETD-135, and ETD-151. The ARD1 peptide was initially purified from the immune hemolymph of the caterpillars of Archeoprepona demophoon. Although it differs from heliomicin by only two residues, it was found to be more active against the human pathogens Aspergillus fumigatus and Candida albicans. The peptides ETD-135 and ETD-151 were engineered by site-directed mutagenesis of ARD1 in either cationic or hydrophobic regions. ETD-135 and ETD-151 demonstrated an improved antifungal activity over the native peptides, heliomicin and ARD1. A comparative analysis of the 3D structure of the four molecules highlighted the direct impact of the modification of the amphipathic properties on the molecule potency. In addition, it allowed to characterize an optimal organization of cationic and hydrophobic regions to achieve best antifungal activity.
8634289	Cooperative interactions of RNA and thiostrepton antibiotic with two domains of ribosomal protein L11.	Ribosomal protein L11 interacts with a 58-nucleotide domain of large subunit ribosomal RNA; both the protein and its RNA target have been highly conserved. The antibiotic thiostrepton recognizes the same RNA domain, and binds to the ribosome cooperatively with L11. Experiments presented here show that RNA recognition and thiostrepton cooperativity can be attributed to C- and N-terminal domains of L11, respectively. Under trypsin digestion conditions that degrade Bacillus stearothermophilus L11 to small fragments, the target RNA protects the C-terminal 77 residues from digestion, and thiostrepton and RNA in combination protect the entire protein. A 76-residue C-terminal fragment of L11 was overexpressed and shown to fold into a stable structure binding ribosomal RNA with essentially the same properties as full-length L11. An L11.thiostrepton.RNA complex was 100-200-fold more stable than expected on the basis of L11-RNA and thiostrepton-RNA binding affinities; similar measurements with the C-terminal fragment detected no cooperativity with thiostrepton. L11 function is thus more complex than simple interaction with ribosomal RNA; we suggest that thiostrepton mimics some ribosomal component or factor that normally interacts with the L11 N-terminal domain.
16131751	Structures of the oxidized and reduced forms of nitrite reductase from Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.3 at high pH: changes in the interactions of the type 2 copper.	Nitrite reductase is an enzyme operating in the denitrification pathway which catalyses the conversion of nitrite (NO2(-)) to gaseous nitric oxide (NO). Here, crystal structures of the oxidized and reduced forms of the copper-containing nitrite reductase from Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.3 are presented at 1.74 and 1.85 A resolution, respectively. Whereas the structure of the enzyme is very similar to those of other copper-containing nitrite reductases, folding as a trimer and containing two copper sites per monomer, the structures reported here enable conformational differences between the oxidized and reduced forms of the enzyme to be identified. In the type 1 copper site, a rotational perturbation of the side chain of the copper ligand Met182 occurs upon reduction. At the type 2 copper site, a dual conformation of the catalytic residue His287 is observed in the oxidized structure but is lacking in the reduced structure, such that the interactions of the oxidized type 2 copper ion can be regarded as adopting octahedral geometry. These findings shed light on the structural mechanism of the reduction of a copper-bound nitrite to nitric oxide and water.
2001356	High-resolution three-dimensional structure of reduced recombinant human thioredoxin in solution.	The solution structure of recombinant human thioredoxin (105 residues) has been determined by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy combined with hybrid distance geometry-dynamical simulated annealing calculations. Approximate interproton distance restraints were derived from nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) measurements. In addition, a large number of stereospecific assignments for beta-methylene protons and torsion angle restraints for phi, psi, and chi 1 were obtained by using a conformational grid search on the basis of the intraresidue and sequential NOE data in conjunction with 3JHN alpha and 3J alpha beta coupling constants. The structure calculations were based on 1983 approximate interproton distance restraints, 52 hydrogen-bonding restraints for 26 hydrogen bonds, and 98 phi, 71 psi, and 72 chi 1 torsion angle restraints. The 33 final simulated annealing structures obtained had an average atomic rms distribution of the individual structures about the mean coordinate positions of 0.40 +/- 0.06 A for the backbone atoms and 0.78 +/- 0.05 A for all atoms. The solution structure of human thioredoxin consists of a five-stranded beta-sheet surrounded by four alpha-helices, with an active site protrusion containing the two redox-active cysteines. The overall structure is similar to the crystal and NMR structures of oxidized [Katti, S. K., LeMaster, D. M., & Eklund, H. (1990) J. Mol. Biol. 212, 167-184] and reduced [Dyson, J. H., Gippert, G. P., Case, D. A., Holmgren, A., & Wright, P. (1990) Biochemistry 29, 4129-4136] Escherichia coli thioredoxin, respectively, despite the moderate 25% amino acid sequence homology. Several differences, however, can be noted. The human alpha 1 helix is a full turn longer than the corresponding helix in E. coli thioredoxin and is characterized by a more regular helical geometry. The helix labeled alpha 3 in human thioredoxin has its counterpart in the 3(10) helix of the E. coli protein and is also longer in the human protein. In contrast to these structural differences, the conformation of the active site loop in both proteins is very similar, reflecting the perfect sequence identity for a stretch of eight amino acid residues around the redox-active cysteines.
9695945	Prolyl oligopeptidase: an unusual beta-propeller domain regulates proteolysis.	Prolyl oligopeptidase is a large cytosolic enzyme that belongs to a new class of serine peptidases. The enzyme is involved in the maturation and degradation of peptide hormones and neuropeptides, which relate to the induction of amnesia. The 1.4 A resolution crystal structure is presented here. The enzyme contains a peptidase domain with an alpha/beta hydrolase fold, and its catalytic triad (Ser554, His680, Asp641) is covered by the central tunnel of an unusual beta propeller. This domain makes prolyl oligopeptidase an oligopeptidase by excluding large structured peptides from the active site. In this way, the propeller protects larger peptides and proteins from proteolysis in the cytosol. The structure is also obtained with a transition state inhibitor, which may facilitate drug design to treat memory disorders.
1304894	Functional mapping of the surface of Escherichia coli ribose-binding protein: mutations that affect chemotaxis and transport.	Ribose-binding protein is a bifunctional soluble receptor found in the periplasm of Escherichia coli. Interaction of liganded binding protein with the ribose high affinity transport complex results in the transfer of ribose across the cytoplasmic membrane. Alternatively, interaction of liganded binding protein with a chemotactic signal transducer, Trg, initiates taxis toward ribose. We have generated a functional map of the surface of ribose-binding protein by creating and analyzing directed mutations of exposed residues. Residues in an area on the cleft side of the molecule including both domains have effects on transport. A portion of the area involved in transport is also essential to chemotactic function. On the opposite face of the protein, mutations in residues near the hinge are shown to affect chemotaxis specifically.
15628861	zFP538, a yellow-fluorescent protein from Zoanthus, contains a novel three-ring chromophore.	Crystal structures of the tetrameric yellow-fluorescent protein zFP538 from the button polyp Zoanthus sp. and a green-emitting mutant (K66M) are presented. The atomic models have been refined at 2.7 and 2.5 A resolution, with final crystallographic R factors of 0.206 (R(free) = 0.255) and 0.190 (R(free) = 0.295), respectively, and have excellent stereochemistry. The fold of the protomer is very similar to that of green (GFP) and red (DsRed) fluorescent proteins; however, evidence from crystallography and mass spectrometry suggests that zFP538 contains a three-ring chromophore derived from that of GFP. The yellow-emitting species (lambda(em)(max) = 538 nm) is proposed to result from a transimination reaction in which a transiently appearing DsRed-like acylimine is attacked by the terminal amino group of lysine 66 to form a new six-membered ring, cleaving the polypeptide backbone at the 65-66 position. This extends the chromophore conjugation by an additional double bond compared to GFP, lowering the absorption and emission frequencies. Substitution of lysine 66 with aspartate or glutamate partially converts zFP538 into a red-fluorescent protein, providing additional support for an acylimine intermediate. The diverse and unexpected roles of the side chain at position 66 give new insight into the chemistry of chromophore maturation in the extended family of GFP-like proteins.
16004871	Structural basis and kinetics of DsbD-dependent cytochrome c maturation.	DsbD from Escherichia coli transports two electrons from cytoplasmic thioredoxin to the periplasmic substrate proteins DsbC, DsbG and CcmG. DsbD consists of an N-terminal periplasmic domain (nDsbD), a C-terminal periplasmic domain, and a central transmembrane domain. Each domain possesses two cysteines required for electron transport. Herein, we demonstrate fast (3.9 x 10(5) M(-1)s(-1)) and direct disulfide exchange between nDsbD and CcmG, a highly specific disulfide reductase essential for cytochrome c maturation. We determined the crystal structure of the disulfide-linked complex between nDsbD and the soluble part of CcmG at 1.94 A resolution. In contrast to the other two known complexes of nDsbD with target proteins, the N-terminal segment of nDsbD contributes to specific recognition of CcmG. This and other features, like the possibility of using an additional interaction surface, constitute the structural basis for the adaptability of nDsbD to different protein substrates.
8987974	X-ray crystallographic studies of alanine-65 variants of carbonic anhydrase II reveal the structural basis of compromised proton transfer in catalysis.	The three-dimensional structures of A65F, A65L, A65H, A65T, A65S, and A65G human carbonic anhydrase II (CAII) variants have been solved by X-ray crystallographic methods to probe the importance of residue 65 and the structural implications of its evolutionary drift in the greater family of carbonic anhydrase isozymes. Structure-activity relationships in this series of CAII variants are correlated with those established for other carbonic anhydrase isozymes. We conclude that a bulky side chain at position 65 hinders the formation of an effective solvent bridge between zinc-bound water and H64 and thereby hinders solvent-mediated proton transfer between these two groups [Jackman, J. E., Merz, K. M., Jr., & Fierke, C. A. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 16421-16428]. Despite the introduction of a polar hydroxyl group at this position, smaller side chains such as serine or threonine substituted for A65 do not perturb the formation of a solvent bridge between H64 and zinc-bound solvent. Thus, the evolution of residue 65 size is one factor affecting the trajectory of catalytic proton transfer.
12033935	Tryptophan 80 and leucine 143 are critical for the hydride transfer step of thymidylate synthase by controlling active site access.	Mutant forms of thymidylate synthase (TS) with substitutions at the conserved active site residue, Trp 80, are deficient in the hydride transfer step of the TS reaction. These mutants produce a beta-mercaptoethanol (beta-ME) adduct of the 2'-deoxyuridine-5'-monophosphate (dUMP) exocyclic methylene intermediate. Trp 80 has been proposed to assist hydride transfer by stabilizing a 5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate (THF) radical cation intermediate [Barrett, J. E., Lucero, C. M., and Schultz, P. G. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 7965-7966.] formed after THF changes its binding from the cofactor pocket to a putative alternate site. To understand the molecular basis of hydride transfer deficiency in a mutant in which Trp 80 was changed to Gly, we determined the X-ray structures of this mutant Escherichia coli TS complexed with dUMP and the folate analogue 10-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolate (CB3717) and of the wild-type enzyme complexed with dUMP and THF. The mutant enzyme has a cavity in the active site continuous with bulk solvent. This cavity, sealed from bulk solvent in wild-type TS by Leu 143, would allow nucleophilic attack of beta-ME on the dUMP C5 exocyclic methylene. The structure of the wild-type enzyme/dUMP/THF complex shows that THF is bound in the cofactor binding pocket and is well positioned to transfer hydride to the dUMP exocyclic methylene. Together, these results suggest that THF does not reorient during hydride transfer and indicate that the role of Trp 80 may be to orient Leu 143 to shield the active site from bulk solvent and to optimally position the cofactor for hydride transfer.
15930632	Different crystal packing in Fab-protein L semi-disordered peptide complex.	Proteins and peptides with variable degrees of disorder are a challenge for protein crystallization. These may be completely disordered or just contain regions with a high degree of mobility that may be represented by a multitude of discretely defined conformations. These difficulties are not insurmountable, but it may be unreasonable to expect a clean result from a structural point of view. The complex between a murine monoclonal antibody (19D9D6) and a synthetic peptide that encompasses the first 45 residues of the core protein of Hepatitis C virus that is poorly structured in solution has been crystallized. In order to make the crystallization possible, use was made of a single immunoglobulin-binding domain of protein L from Peptostreptococcus magnus (PpL), a bacterial protein that can bind the variable region (Fv) of a large population of antibodies through its light chain with no interference with antibody-antigen recognition. Crystals were obtained in different space groups where the size of the cavity that accommodates the peptide is different, although many of the crystal contacts and the overall lattice are preserved. The peptide can be considered to be semi-disordered and the larger cavity accommodates a better ordered peptide than the smaller one. The lattice is of interest for the design of a scaffold system for the crystallization of peptide-tagged proteins since a cavity that accommodates a disordered entity might be able to host ordered proteins of the same size and shape as the cavity. Here, the differences between the lattices formed by this trimolecular complex are described and it is discussed how such a system may be adapted to the crystallization of peptide-tagged proteins.
8384877	The Asp-His-Fe triad of cytochrome c peroxidase controls the reduction potential, electronic structure, and coupling of the tryptophan free radical to the heme.	The buried charge of Asp-235 in cytochrome c peroxidase (CCP) forms an important hydrogen bond to the histidine ligand of the heme iron. The Asp-His-metal interaction, which is similar to the catalytic triad of serine proteases, is found at the active site of many metalloenzymes and is believed to modulate the character of histidine as a metal ligand. We have examined the influence of this interaction in CCP on the function, redox properties, and iron zero-field splitting in the native ferric state and its effect on the Trp-191 free radical site in the oxidized ES complex. Unlike D235A and D235N, the mutation D235E introduces very little perturbation in the X-ray crystal structure of the enzyme active site, with only minor changes in the geometry of the carboxylate-histidine interaction and no observable change at the Trp-191 free radical site. More significant effects are observed in the position of the helix containing residue Glu-235. However, the small change in hydrogen bond geometry is all that is necessary to (1) increase the reduction potential by 70 mV, (2) alter the anisotropy of the Trp-191 free radical EPR, (3) affect the activity and spin-state equilibrium, and (4) reduce the strength of the iron ligand field as measured by the zero-field splitting. The changes in the redox potential with substitution are correlated with the observed zero-field splitting, suggesting that redox control is exerted through the heme ligand by a combination of electrostatic and ligand field effects. The replacement of Asp-235 with Glu appears to result in a significantly weaker hydrogen bond in which the proton resides essentially with His-175. This hydrogen bond is nevertheless strong enough to prevent the reorientation of Trp-191 and the conversion to one of two low-spin states observed for D235A and D235N. The Asp-His-Fe interaction is therefore as important in defining the redox properties and imidazolate character of His-175 as has been proposed, yet its most important role in peroxidase function may be to correctly orient Trp-191 for efficient coupling of the free radical to the heme and to maintain a high-spin 5-coordinate heme center.
10535917	A structural view of evolutionary divergence.	Two directed evolution experiments on p-nitrobenzyl esterase yielded one enzyme with a 100-fold increased activity in aqueous-organic solvents and another with a 17 degrees C increase in thermostability. Structures of the wild type and its organophilic and thermophilic counterparts are presented at resolutions of 1.5 A, 1.6 A, and 2.0 A, respectively. These structures identify groups of interacting mutations and demonstrate how directed evolution can traverse complex fitness landscapes. Early-generation mutations stabilize flexible loops not visible in the wild-type structure and set the stage for further beneficial mutations in later generations. The mutations exert their influence on the esterase structure over large distances, in a manner that would be difficult to predict. The loops with the largest structural changes generally are not the sites of mutations. Similarly, none of the seven amino acid substitutions in the organophile are in the active site, even though the enzyme experiences significant changes in the organization of this site. In addition to reduction of surface loop flexibility, thermostability in the evolved esterase results from altered core packing, helix stabilization, and the acquisition of surface salt bridges, in agreement with other comparative studies of mesophilic and thermophilic enzymes. Crystallographic analysis of the wild type and its evolved counterparts reveals networks of mutations that collectively reorganize the active site. Interestingly, the changes that led to diversity within the alpha/beta hydrolase enzyme family and the reorganization seen in this study result from main-chain movements.
15932939	Structural basis of the Sir1-origin recognition complex interaction in transcriptional silencing.	The Sir1 protein plays a key role in establishing a silent chromatin structure at the cryptic mating-type loci HMR and HML in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by interacting with the bromo-adjacent homology (BAH) domain of the Orc1p subunit of the origin recognition complex (ORC). Here, we present the high-resolution crystal structures of the ORC interaction region (OIR) of Sir1p and that of the complex formed between the OIR and BAH domains. Amino acids within the OIR previously shown to be required for a Sir1p/ORC interaction are presented on a conserved, convex surface that forms a complementary interface with a concave region of the Orc1 BAH domain that is critical for transcriptional silencing. The OIR/BAH interaction surface comprises a network of hydrophobic and polar/ionic interactions between discrete structural modules in each protein and involves several residues that were not implicated in previous studies. These data provide important structural insights into a protein-protein interaction critical for the formation of a specialized chromatin domain within eukaryotic chromosomes.
8331655	Structure and function of the Escherichia coli ribonucleotide reductase protein R2.	The crystal structure of the ribonucleotide reductase free radical protein R2 from Escherichia coli has been determined by multiple isomorphous replacement and twofold molecular averaging. The structure has been refined at 2.2 A resolution to R = 0.175. The subunit structure of the R2 protein has a novel fold where the basic motif is a bundle of eight long helices. The R2 dimer has two equivalent dinuclear iron centers. Each iron center is well buried in the subunit. The iron atoms have both histidine and carboxyl acid ligands and are bridged by an oxide ion and the carboxylate group of Glu115. One iron atom is octahedrally coordinated with small deviations from ideal values, while the coordination of the other iron ion is more distorted, mainly due to the fact that Asp84 is a bidental ligand to this iron atom. The oxidation of the enzymatically essential tyrosine residue (Tyr122) and the dinuclear iron center by molecular oxygen is suggested to take part in a suitable conserved oxygen-binding pocket between the iron center and the tyrosine zeta-oxygen 5.3 A away from the closest iron ion. The tyrosine proton can be abstracted by the dioxygen and the deprotonated tyrosine residue is then more easily oxidized to a radical species. Tyr122 is buried inside the protein about 10 A from the surface. This has the consequence that the tyrosyl radical cannot participate directly in hydrogen abstraction from the substrate ribose at the active site of the holoenzyme located on the R1 subunit. The radical must then be indirectly involved in the mechanism of the enzyme and an electron transfer reaction between the active site and the tyrosine must take place. Based on the analysis of the available ribonucleotide reductase sequences, the binding surface for the large ribonucleotide reductase protein R1, and a possible route for an electron transport between the buried radical and this surface is described.
11447291	A mutant cholera toxin B subunit that binds GM1- ganglioside but lacks immunomodulatory or toxic activity.	GM1-ganglioside receptor binding by the B subunit of cholera toxin (CtxB) is widely accepted to initiate toxin action by triggering uptake and delivery of the toxin A subunit into cells. More recently, GM1 binding by isolated CtxB, or the related B subunit of Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin (EtxB), has been found to modulate leukocyte function, resulting in the down-regulation of proinflammatory immune responses that cause autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and diabetes. Here, we demonstrate that GM1 binding, contrary to expectation, is not sufficient to initiate toxin action. We report the engineering and crystallographic structure of a mutant cholera toxin, with a His to Ala substitution in the B subunit at position 57. Whereas the mutant retained pentameric stability and high affinity binding to GM1-ganglioside, it had lost its immunomodulatory activity and, when part of the holotoxin complex, exhibited ablated toxicity. The implications of these findings on the mode of action of cholera toxin are discussed.
15252033	The anticoagulant thrombin mutant W215A/E217A has a collapsed primary specificity pocket.	The thrombin mutant W215A/E217A features a drastically impaired catalytic activity toward chromogenic and natural substrates but efficiently activates the anticoagulant protein C in the presence of thrombomodulin. As the remarkable anticoagulant properties of this mutant continue to be unraveled in preclinical studies, we solved the x-ray crystal structures of its free form and its complex with the active site inhibitor H-d-Phe-Pro-Arg-CH(2)Cl (PPACK). The PPACK-bound structure of W215A/E217A is identical to the structure of the PPACK-bound slow form of thrombin. On the other hand, the structure of the free form reveals a collapse of the 215-217 strand that crushes the primary specificity pocket. The collapse results from abrogation of the stacking interaction between Phe-227 and Trp-215 and the polar interactions of Glu-217 with Thr-172 and Lys-224. Other notable changes are a rotation of the carboxylate group of Asp-189, breakage of the H-bond between the catalytic residues Ser-195 and His-57, breakage of the ion pair between Asp-222 and Arg-187, and significant disorder in the 186- and 220-loops that define the Na(+) site. These findings explain the impaired catalytic activity of W215A/E217A and demonstrate that the analysis of the molecular basis of substrate recognition by thrombin and other proteases requires crystallization of both the free and bound forms of the enzyme.
15795221	The molecular architecture of galactose mutarotase/UDP-galactose 4-epimerase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.	The metabolic pathway by which beta-D-galactose is converted to glucose 1-phosphate is known as the Leloir pathway and consists of four enzymes. In most organisms, these enzymes appear to exist as soluble entities in the cytoplasm. In yeast such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, however, the first and last enzymes of the pathway, galactose mutarotase and UDP-galactose 4-epimerase, are contained within a single polypeptide chain referred to as Gal10p. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of Gal10p in complex with NAD(+), UDP-glucose, and beta-D-galactose determined to 1.85-A resolution. The enzyme is dimeric with dimensions of approximately 91 A x 135 A x 108 A and assumes an almost V-shaped appearance. The overall architecture of the individual subunits can be described in terms of two separate N- and C-terminal domains connected by a Type II turn formed by Leu-357 to Val-360. The first 356 residues of Gal10p fold into the classical bilobal topology observed for all other UDP-galactose 4-epimerases studied thus far. This N-terminal domain contains the binding sites for NAD(+) and UDP-glucose. The polypeptide chain extending from Glu-361 to Ser-699 adopts a beta-sandwich motif and harbors the binding site for beta-D-galactose. The two active sites of Gal10p are separated by over 50 A. This investigation represents the first structural analysis of a dual function enzyme in the Leloir pathway.
12479822	A structural basis for LCMV immune evasion: subversion of H-2D(b) and H-2K(b) presentation of gp33 revealed by comparative crystal structure.Analyses.	LCMV infection of H-2(b) mice generates a CD8(+) CTL response mainly directed toward three immunodominant epitopes. One of these, gp33, is presented by both H-2D(b) and H-2K(b) MHC class I molecules. The virus can escape immune recognition in the context of both these MHC class I molecules through single mutations of the peptide. In order to understand the underlying structural mechanism, we determined the crystal structures of both complexes. The structures reveal that the peptide is presented in two diametrically opposed manners by H-2D(b) and H-2K(b), with residues used as anchor positions in one MHC class I molecule interacting with the TCR in the other. Importantly, the peptide's N-terminal residue p1K protrudes from the binding cleft in H-2K(b). We present structural evidence that explains the functional consequences of single mutations found in escape variants.
12414796	Contribution of glycine 146 to a conserved folding module affecting stability and refolding of human glutathione transferase p1-1.	In human glutathione transferase P1-1 (hGSTP1-1) position 146 is occupied by a glycine residue, which is located in a bend of a long loop that together with the alpha6-helix forms a substructure (GST motif II) maintained in all soluble GSTs. In the present study G146A and G146V mutants were generated by site-directed mutagenesis in order to investigate the function played by this conserved residue in folding and stability of hGSTP1-1. Crystallographic analysis of the G146V variant, expressed at the permissive temperature of 25 degrees C, indicates that the mutation causes a substantial change of the backbone conformation because of steric hindrance. Stability measurements indicate that this mutant is inactivated at a temperature as low as 32 degrees C. The structure of the G146A mutant is identical to that of the wild type with the mutated residue having main-chain bond angles in a high energy region of the Ramachandran plot. However even this Gly --> Ala substitution inactivates the enzyme at 37 degrees C. Thermodynamic analysis of all variants confirms, together with previous findings, the critical role played by GST motif II for overall protein stability. Analysis of reactivation in vitro indicates that any mutation of Gly-146 alters the folding pathway by favoring aggregation at 37 degrees C. It is hypothesized that the GST motif II is involved in the nucleation mechanism of the protein and that the substitution of Gly-146 alters this transient substructure. Gly-146 is part of the buried local sequence GXXh(T/S)XXDh (X is any residue and h is a hydrophobic residue), conserved in all GSTs and related proteins that seems to behave as a characteristic structural module important for protein folding and stability.
14699104	The structural GDP/GTP cycle of Rab11 reveals a novel interface involved in the dynamics of recycling endosomes.	The small GTP-binding protein Rab11 is an essential regulator of the dynamics of recycling endosomes. Here we report the crystallographic analysis of the GDP/GTP cycle of human Rab11a, and a structure-based mutagenesis study that identifies a novel mutant phenotype. The crystal structures show that the nucleotide-sensitive switch 1 and 2 regions differ from those of other Rab proteins. In Rab11-GDP, they contribute to a close packed symmetrical dimer, which may associate to membranes in the cell and allow Rab11 to undergo GDP/GTP cycles without recycling to the cytosol. The structure of active Rab11 delineates a three-dimensional site that includes switch 1 and is separate from the site defined by the Rab3/Rabphilin interface. It is proposed to form a novel interface for a Rab11 partner compatible with the simultaneous binding of another partner at the Rabphilin interface. Mutation of Ser(29) to Phe in this epitope resulted in morphological modifications of the recycling compartment that are distinct from those induced by the classical dominant-negative and constitutively active Rab11 mutants. Recycling endosomes condensed in the perinuclear region where they retained recycling transferrin, and they clustered Rab11- and EEA1-positive membranes. Altogether, our study suggests that this mutation impairs a specific subset of Rab11 interactions, possibly those involved in cytoskeleton-based movements driving the slow recycling pathway.
15880695	Metal ions as cofactors for the binding of inhibitors to methionine aminopeptidase: a critical view of the relevance of in vitro metalloenzyme assays.	
8316857	Three-dimensional structure of myosin subfragment-1: a molecular motor.	Directed movement is a characteristic of many living organisms and occurs as a result of the transformation of chemical energy into mechanical energy. Myosin is one of three families of molecular motors that are responsible for cellular motility. The three-dimensional structure of the head portion of myosin, or subfragment-1, which contains both the actin and nucleotide binding sites, is described. This structure of a molecular motor was determined by single crystal x-ray diffraction. The data provide a structural framework for understanding the molecular basis of motility.
15280952	Nucleophilic and general acid catalysis at physiological pH by a designed miniature esterase.	A 31-residue peptide (Art-Est) was designed to catalyse the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl esters through histidine catalysis on the solvent exposed face of the alpha-helix of bovine pancreatic polypeptide. NMR spectroscopy indicated that Art-Est adopted a stable 3-dimensional structure in solution. Art-Est was an efficient catalyst with second order rate constants of up to 0.050 M(-1) s(-1). The activity of Art-Est was a consequence of the increased nucleophilicity of His-22, which had a reduced pK(a) value of 5.5 as a consequence of its interaction with His-18 and the positively charged Arg-25 and Arg-26. Mass spectrometry and NMR spectroscopy confirmed that the Art-Est catalysed hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl esters proceeded through an acyl-enzyme intermediate. A solvent kinetic isotope effect of 1.8 indicated that the transition state preceding the acyl intermediate was stabilised through interaction with the protonated side-chain of His-18 and indicated a reaction mechanism similar to that generally observed for natural esterases. The involvement in the reaction of two histidine residues with different pK(a) values led to a bell-shaped dependence of the reaction rate on the pH of the solution. The catalytic behaviour of Art-Est indicated that designed miniature enzymes can act in a transparent mechanism based fashion with enzyme-like behaviour through the interplay of several amino acid residues.
12374866	Expanding pyrimidine diphosphosugar libraries via structure-based nucleotidylyltransferase engineering.	In vitro "glycorandomization" is a chemoenzymatic approach for generating diverse libraries of glycosylated biomolecules based on natural product scaffolds. This technology makes use of engineered variants of specific enzymes affecting metabolite glycosylation, particularly nucleotidylyltransferases and glycosyltransferases. To expand the repertoire of UDP/dTDP sugars readily available for glycorandomization, we now report a structure-based engineering approach to increase the diversity of alpha-d-hexopyranosyl phosphates accepted by Salmonella enterica LT2 alpha-d-glucopyranosyl phosphate thymidylyltransferase (E(p)). This article highlights the design rationale, determined substrate specificity, and structural elucidation of three "designed" mutations, illustrating both the success and unexpected outcomes from this type of approach. In addition, a single amino acid substitution in the substrate-binding pocket (L89T) was found to significantly increase the set of alpha-d-hexopyranosyl phosphates accepted by E(p) to include alpha-d-allo-, alpha-d-altro-, and alpha-d-talopyranosyl phosphate. In aggregate, our results provide valuable blueprints for altering nucleotidylyltransferase specificity by design, which is the first step toward in vitro glycorandomization.
11371193	Role of charged residues at the OmpF porin channel constriction probed by mutagenesis and simulation.	The channel constriction of OmpF porin, a pore protein in the bacterial outer membrane, is highly charged due to the presence of three arginines (R42, R82, and R132) and two acidic residues (D113 and E117). The influence of these charges on ion conductance, ion selectivity, and voltage gating has been studied with mutants D113N/E117Q, R42A/R82A/R132A/D113N/E117Q, and V18K/G131K, which were designed to remove or add protein charge at the channel constriction. The crystal structures revealed no or only local changes compared to wild-type OmpF, thus allowing a comparative study. The single-channel conductance of the isosteric D113N/E117Q variant was found to be 2-fold reduced, and that of the pentuple mutant was 70% of the wild-type value, despite a considerably larger pore cross section. Ion selectivity was drastically altered by the mutations with cation/anion permeability ratios ranging from 1 to 12. Ion flow through these and eight other mutants, which have been characterized previously, was simulated by Brownian dynamics based on the detailed crystal structures. The calculated ion selectivity and relative channel conductance values agree well with the experimental data. This demonstrates that ion translocation through porin is mainly governed by pore geometry and charge, the two factors that are properly represented in the simulations.
9139923	Characterization of the Bacillus subtilis thiC operon involved in thiamine biosynthesis.	The characterization of a three-gene operon (the thiC operon) at 331 min, which is involved in thiamine biosynthesis in Bacillus subtilis, is described. The first gene in the operon is homologous to transcription activators in the lysR family. The second and third genes (thiK and thiC) have been subcloned and overexpressed in Escherichia coli. ThiK (30 kDa) catalyzes the phosphorylation of 4-methyl-5-(beta-hydroxyethyl)thiazole. ThiC (27 kDa) catalyzes the substitution of the pyrophosphate of 2-methyl-4-amino-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine pyrophosphate by 4-methyl-5-(beta-hydroxyethyl)thiazole phosphate to yield thiamine phosphate. Transcription of the thiC operon is not regulated by thiamine or 2-methyl-4-amino-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine and is only slightly repressed by 4-methyl-5-(beta-hydroxyethyl)thiazole.
11124030	Crystal structure of Hsc20, a J-type Co-chaperone from Escherichia coli.	Hsc20 is a 20 kDa J-protein that regulates the ATPase activity and peptide-binding specificity of Hsc66, an hsp70-class molecular chaperone. We report herein the crystal structure of Hsc20 from Escherichia coli determined to a resolution of 1.8 A using a combination of single isomorphous replacement (SIR) and multi-wavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD). The overall structure of Hsc20 consists of two distinct domains, an N-terminal J-domain containing residues 1-75 connected by a short loop to a C-terminal domain containing residues 84-171. The structure of the J-domain, involved in interactions with Hsc66, resembles the alpha-topology of J-domain fragments of Escherichia coli DnaJ and human Hdj1 previously determined by solution NMR methods. The C-terminal domain, implicated in binding and targeting proteins to Hsc66, consists of a three-helix bundle in which two helices comprise an anti-parallel coiled-coil. The two domains make contact through an extensive hydrophobic interface ( approximately 650 A(2)) suggesting that their relative orientations are fixed. Thus, Hsc20, in addition to its role in the regulation of the ATPase activity of Hsc66, may also function as a rigid scaffold to facilitate positioning of the protein substrates targeted to Hsc66.
15510218	Crystal structure of ATF-2/c-Jun and IRF-3 bound to the interferon-beta enhancer.	Transcriptional activation of the interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene requires assembly of an enhanceosome containing the transcription factors ATF-2/c-Jun, IRF-3/IRF-7, NF-kappaB and HMGI(Y). These factors cooperatively bind a composite DNA site and activate expression of the IFN-beta gene. The 3.0 A crystal structure of the DNA-binding domains of ATF-2/c-Jun and two IRF-3 molecules in a complex with 31 base pairs (bp) of the PRDIV-PRDIII region of the IFN-beta enhancer shows that association of the four proteins with DNA creates a continuous surface for the recognition of 24 bp. The structure, together with in vitro binding studies and protein mutagenesis, shows that protein-protein interactions are not critical for cooperative binding. Instead, cooperativity arises mainly through nucleotide sequence-dependent structural changes in the DNA that allow formation of complementary DNA conformations. Because the binding sites overlap on the enhancer, the unit of recognition is the entire nucleotide sequence, not the individual subsites.
14661960	Thermodynamic cycle analysis and inhibitor design against beta-lactamase.	Beta-lactamases are the most widespread resistance mechanism to beta-lactam antibiotics, such as the penicillins and cephalosporins. Transition-state analogues that bind to the enzymes with nanomolar affinities have been introduced in an effort to reverse the resistance conferred by these enzymes. To understand the origins of this affinity, and to guide design of future inhibitors, double-mutant thermodynamic cycle experiments were undertaken. An unexpected hydrogen bond between the nonconserved Asn289 and a key inhibitor carboxylate was observed in the X-ray crystal structure of a 1 nM inhibitor (compound 1) in complex with AmpC beta-lactamase. To investigate the energy of this hydrogen bond, the mutant enzyme N289A was made, as was an analogue of 1 that lacked the carboxylate (compound 2). The differential affinity of the four different protein and analogue complexes indicates that the carboxylate-amide hydrogen bond contributes 1.7 kcal/mol to overall binding affinity. Synthesis of an analogue of 1 where the carboxylate was replaced with an aldehyde led to an inhibitor that lost all this hydrogen bond energy, consistent with the importance of the ionic nature of this hydrogen bond. To investigate the structural bases of these energies, X-ray crystal structures of N289A/1 and N289A/2 were determined to 1.49 and 1.39 A, respectively. These structures suggest that no significant rearrangement occurs in the mutant versus the wild-type complexes with both compounds. The mutant enzymes L119A and L293A were made to investigate the interaction between a phenyl ring in 1 and these residues. Whereas deletion of the phenyl itself diminishes affinity by 5-fold, the double-mutant cycles suggest that this energy does not come through interaction with the leucines, despite the close contact in the structure. The energies of these interactions provide key information for the design of improved inhibitors against beta-lactamases. The high magnitude of the ion-dipole interaction between Asn289 and the carboxylate of 1 is consistent with the idea that ionic interactions can provide significant net affinity in inhibitor complexes.
15313618	Structural evidence for direct hydride transfer from NADH to cytochrome P450nor.	Nitric oxide reductase cytochrome P450nor catalyzes an unusual reaction, direct electron transfer from NAD(P)H to bound heme. Here, we succeeded in determining the crystal structure of P450nor in a complex with an NADH analogue, nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide, which provides conclusive evidence for the mechanism of the unprecedented electron transfer. Comparison of the structure with those of dinucleotide-free forms revealed a global conformational change accompanied by intriguing local movements caused by the binding of the pyridine nucleotide. Arg64 and Arg174 fix the pyrophosphate moiety upon the dinucleotide binding. Stereo-selective hydride transfer from NADH to NO-bound heme was suggested from the structure, the nicotinic acid ring being fixed near the heme by the conserved Thr residue in the I-helix and the upward-shifted propionate side-chain of the heme. A proton channel near the NADH channel is formed upon the dinucleotide binding, which should direct continuous transfer of the hydride and proton. A salt-bridge network (Glu71-Arg64-Asp88) was shown to be crucial for a high catalytic turnover.
11258921	Large-scale domain movements and hydration structure changes in the active-site cleft of unligated glutamate dehydrogenase from Thermococcus profundus studied by cryogenic X-ray crystal structure analysis and small-angle X-ray scattering.	Here we describe the large-scale domain movements and hydration structure changes in the active-site cleft of unligated glutamate dehydrogenase. Glutamate dehydrogenase from Thermococcus profundus is composed of six identical subunits of M(r) 46K, each with two distinct domains of roughly equal size separated by a large active-site cleft. The enzyme in the unligated state was crystallized so that one hexamer occupied a crystallographic asymmetric unit, and the crystal structure of the hexamer was solved and refined at a resolution of 2.25 A with a crystallographic R-factor of 0.190. In that structure, the six subunits displayed significant conformational variations with respect to the orientations of the two domains. The variation was most likely explained as a hinge-bending motion caused by small changes in the main chain torsion angle of the residue composing a loop connecting the two domains. Small-angle X-ray scattering profiles both at 293 and 338 K suggested that the apparent molecular size of the hexamer was slightly larger in solution than in the crystalline state. These results led us to the conclusion that (i) the spontaneous domain motion was the property of the enzyme in solution, (ii) the domain motion was trapped in the crystallization process through different modes of crystal contacts, and (iii) the magnitude of the motion in solution was greater than that observed in the crystal structure. The present cryogenic diffraction experiment enabled us to identify 1931 hydration water molecules around the hexamer. The hydration structures around the subunits exhibited significant changes in accord with the degree of the domain movement. In particular, the hydration water molecules in the active-site cleft were rearranged markedly through migrations between specific hydration sites in coupling strongly with the domain movement. We discussed the cooperative dynamics between the domain motion and the hydration structure changes in the active site of the enzyme. The present study provides the first example of a visualized hydration structure varying transiently with the dynamic movements of enzymes and may form a new concept of the dynamics of multidomain enzymes in solution.
10918067	Selected mutations in a mesophilic cytochrome c confer the stability of a thermophilic counterpart.	Mesophilic cytochrome c(551) of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA c(551)) became as stable as its thermophilic counterpart, Hydrogenobacter thermophilus cytochrome c(552) (HT c(552)), through only five amino acid substitutions. The five residues, distributed in three spatially separated regions, were selected and mutated with reference to the corresponding residues in HT c(552) through careful structure comparison. Thermodynamic analysis indicated that the stability of the quintuple mutant of PA c(551) could be partly attained through an enthalpic factor. The solution structure of the mutant showed that, as in HT c(552), there were tighter side chain packings in the mutated regions. Furthermore, the mutant had an increased total accessible surface area, resulting in great negative hydration free energy. Our results provide a novel example of protein stabilization in that limited amino acid substitutions can confer the overall stability of a natural highly thermophilic protein upon a mesophilic molecule.
12842474	Multifunctional xylooligosaccharide/cephalosporin C deacetylase revealed by the hexameric structure of the Bacillus subtilis enzyme at 1.9A resolution.	Esterases and deacetylases active on carbohydrate ligands have been classified into 14 families based upon amino acid sequence similarities. Enzymes from carbohydrate esterase family seven (CE-7) are unusual in that they display activity towards both acetylated xylooligosaccharides and the antibiotic, cephalosporin C. The 1.9A structure of the multifunctional CE-7 esterase (hereinafter CAH) from Bacillus subtilis 168 reveals a classical alpha/beta hydrolase fold encased within a 32 hexamer. This is the first example of a hexameric alpha/beta hydrolase and is further evidence of the versatility of this particular fold, which is used in a wide variety of biological contexts. A narrow entrance tunnel leads to the centre of the molecule, where the six active-centre catalytic triads point towards the tunnel interior and thus are sequestered away from cytoplasmic contents. By analogy to self-compartmentalising proteases, the tunnel entrance may function to hinder access of large substrates to the poly-specific active centre. This would explain the observation that the enzyme is active on a variety of small, acetylated molecules. The structure of an active site mutant in complex with the reaction product, acetate, reveals details of the putative oxyanion binding site, and suggests that substrates bind predominantly through non-specific contacts with protein hydrophobic residues. Protein residues involved in catalysis are tethered by interactions with protein excursions from the canonical alpha/beta hydrolase fold. These excursions also mediate quaternary structure maintenance, so it would appear that catalytic competence is only achieved on protein multimerisation. We suggest that the acetyl xylan esterase (EC 3.1.1.72) and cephalosporin C deacetylase (EC 3.1.1.41) enzymes of the CE-7 family represent a single class of proteins with a multifunctional deacetylase activity against a range of small substrates.
9271499	Molecular structures of the S124A, S124T, and S124V site-directed mutants of UDP-galactose 4-epimerase from Escherichia coli.	UDP-galactose 4-epimerase plays a critical role in sugar metabolism by catalyzing the interconversion of UDP-galactose and UDP-glucose. Originally, it was assumed that the enzyme contained a "traditional" catalytic base that served to abstract a proton from the 4'-hydroxyl group of the UDP-glucose or UDP-galactose substrates during the course of the reaction. However, recent high-resolution X-ray crystallographic analyses of the protein from Escherichia coli have demonstrated the lack of an aspartate, a glutamate, or a histidine residue properly oriented within the active site cleft for serving such a functional role. Rather, the X-ray crystallographic investigation of the epimerase.NADH.UDP-glucose abortive complex from this laboratory has shown that both Ser 124 and Tyr 149 are located within hydrogen bonding distance to the 4'- and 3'-hydroxyl groups of the sugar, respectively. To test the structural role of Ser 124 in the reaction mechanism of epimerase, three site-directed mutant proteins, namely S124A, S124T, and S124V, were constructed and crystals of the S124A.NADH.UDP, S124A.NADH.UDP-glucose, S124T. NADH.UDP-glucose, and S124V.NADH.UDP-glucose complexes were grown. All of the crystals employed in this investigation belonged to the space group P3221 with the following unit cell dimensions: a = b = 83.8 A, c = 108.4 A, and one subunit per asymmetric unit. X-ray data sets were collected to at least 2.15 A resolution, and each protein model was subsequently refined to an R value of lower than 19.0% for all measured X-ray data. The investigations described here demonstrate that the decreases in enzymatic activities observed for these mutant proteins are due to the loss of a properly positioned hydroxyl group at position 124 and not to major tertiary and quaternary structural perturbations. In addition, these structures demonstrate the importance of a hydroxyl group at position 124 in stabilizing the anti conformation of the nicotinamide ring as observed in the previous structural analysis of the epimerase.NADH. UDP complex.
12065399	Crystal structure of the Lactococcus lactis formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase bound to an abasic site analogue-containing DNA.	The formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase (Fpg, MutM) is a bifunctional base excision repair enzyme (DNA glycosylase/AP lyase) that removes a wide range of oxidized purines, such as 8-oxoguanine and imidazole ring-opened purines, from oxidatively damaged DNA. The structure of a non-covalent complex between the Lactoccocus lactis Fpg and a 1,3-propanediol (Pr) abasic site analogue-containing DNA has been solved. Through an asymmetric interaction along the damaged strand and the intercalation of the triad (M75/R109/F111), Fpg pushes out the Pr site from the DNA double helix, recognizing the cytosine opposite the lesion and inducing a 60 degrees bend of the DNA. The specific recognition of this cytosine provides some structural basis for understanding the divergence between Fpg and its structural homologue endo nuclease VIII towards their substrate specificities. In addition, the modelling of the 8-oxoguanine residue allows us to define an enzyme pocket that may accommodate the extrahelical oxidized base.
10080896	Protein mimicry of DNA from crystal structures of the uracil-DNA glycosylase inhibitor protein and its complex with Escherichia coli uracil-DNA glycosylase.	Uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG), which is a critical enzyme in DNA base-excision repair that recognizes and removes uracil from DNA, is specifically and irreversably inhibited by the thermostable uracil-DNA glycosylase inhibitor protein (Ugi). A paradox for the highly specific Ugi inhibition of UDG is how Ugi can successfully mimic DNA backbone interactions for UDG without resulting in significant cross-reactivity with numerous other enzymes that possess DNA backbone binding affinity. High-resolution X-ray crystal structures of Ugi both free and in complex with wild-type and the functionally defective His187Asp mutant Escherichia coli UDGs reveal the detailed molecular basis for duplex DNA backbone mimicry by Ugi. The overall shape and charge distribution of Ugi most closely resembles a midpoint in a trajectory between B-form DNA and the kinked DNA observed in UDG:DNA product complexes. Thus, Ugi targets the mechanism of uracil flipping by UDG and appears to be a transition-state mimic for UDG-flipping of uracil nucleotides from DNA. Essentially all the exquisite shape, electrostatic and hydrophobic complementarity for the high-affinity UDG-Ugi interaction is pre-existing, except for a key flip of the Ugi Gln19 carbonyl group and Glu20 side-chain, which is triggered by the formation of the complex. Conformational changes between unbound Ugi and Ugi complexed with UDG involve the beta-zipper structural motif, which we have named for the reversible pairing observed between intramolecular beta-strands. A similar beta-zipper is observed in the conversion between the open and closed forms of UDG. The combination of extremely high levels of pre-existing structural complementarity to DNA binding features specific to UDG with key local conformational changes in Ugi resolves the UDG-Ugi paradox and suggests a potentially general structural solution to the formation of very high affinity DNA enzyme-inhibitor complexes that avoid cross- reactivity.
15897201	Structural insights into the mechanism of nuclease A, a betabeta alpha metal nuclease from Anabaena.	Nuclease A (NucA) is a nonspecific endonuclease from Anabaena sp. capable of degrading single- and double-stranded DNA and RNA in the presence of divalent metal ions. We have determined the structure of the delta(2-24),D121A mutant of NucA in the presence of Zn2+ and Mn2+ (PDB code 1ZM8). The mutations were introduced to remove the N-terminal signal peptide and to reduce the activity of the nonspecific nuclease, thereby reducing its toxicity to the Escherichia coli expression system. NucA contains a betabeta alpha metal finger motif and a hydrated Mn2+ ion at the active site. Unexpectedly, NucA was found to contain additional metal binding sites approximately 26 A apart from the catalytic metal binding site. A structural comparison between NucA and the closest analog for which structural data exist, the Serratia nuclease, indicates several interesting differences. First, NucA is a monomer rather than a dimer. Second, there is an unexpected structural homology between the N-terminal segments despite a poorly conserved sequence, which in Serratia includes a cysteine bridge thought to play a regulatory role. In addition, although a sequence alignment had suggested that NucA lacks a proposed catalytic residue corresponding to Arg57 in Serratia, the structure determined here indicates that Arg93 in NucA is positioned to fulfill this role. Based on comparison with DNA-bound nuclease structures of the betabeta alpha metal finger nuclease family and available mutational data on NucA, we propose that His124 acts as a catalytic base, and Arg93 participates in the catalysis possibly through stabilization of the transition state.
1132497	Crystals of human erythrocyte glutathione reductase.	null
11739955	Structural mechanisms of QacR induction and multidrug recognition.	The Staphylococcus aureus multidrug binding protein QacR represses transcription of the qacA multidrug transporter gene and is induced by structurally diverse cationic lipophilic drugs. Here, we report the crystal structures of six QacR-drug complexes. Compared to the DNA bound structure, drug binding elicits a coil-to-helix transition that causes induction and creates an expansive multidrug-binding pocket, containing four glutamates and multiple aromatic and polar residues. These structures indicate the presence of separate but linked drug-binding sites within a single protein. This multisite drug-binding mechanism is consonant with studies on multidrug resistance transporters.
12711609	Characterization of a novel Ser-cisSer-Lys catalytic triad in comparison with the classical Ser-His-Asp triad.	Amidase signature family enzymes, which are widespread in nature, contain a newly identified Ser-cisSer-Lys catalytic triad in which the peptide bond between Ser131 and the preceding residue Gly130 is in a cis configuration. In order to characterize the property of the novel triad, we have determined the structures of five mutant malonamidase E2 enzymes that contain a Cys-cisSer-Lys, Ser-cisAla-Lys, or Ser-cisSer-Ala triad or a substitution of Gly130 with alanine. Cysteine cannot replace the role of Ser155 due to a hyper-reactivity of the residue, which results in the modification of the cysteine to cysteinyl sulfinic acid, most likely inside the expression host cells. The lysine residue plays a structural as well as a catalytic role, since the substitution of the residue with alanine disrupts the active site structure completely. The two observations are in sharp contrast with the consequences of the corresponding substitutions in the classical Ser-His-Asp triad. Structural data on the mutant containing the Ser-cisAla-Lys triad convincingly suggest that Ser131 plays an analogous catalytic role as the histidine of the Ser-His-Asp triad. The unusual cis configuration of Ser131 appears essential for the precise contacts of this residue with the other triad residues, as indicated by the near invariance of the preceding glycine residue (Gly130), structural data on the G130A mutant, and by a modeling experiment. The data provide a deep understanding of the role of each residue of the new triad at the atomic level and demonstrate that the new triad is a catalytic device distinctively different from the classical triad or its variants.
4508314	Structure of the radical form of clostridial flavodoxin: a new molecular model.	null
9774108	Efficiency of signalling through cytokine receptors depends critically on receptor orientation.	Human erythropoietin is a haematopoietic cytokine required for the differentiation and proliferation of precursor cells into red blood cells. It activates cells by binding and orientating two cell-surface erythropoietin receptors (EPORs) which trigger an intracellular phosphorylation cascade. The half-maximal response in a cellular proliferation assay is evoked at an erythropoietin concentration of 10 pM, 10(-2) of its Kd value for erythropoietin-EPOR binding site 1 (Kd approximately equal to nM), and 10(-5) of the Kd for erythropoietin-EPOR binding site 2 (Kd approximately equal to 1 microM). Overall half-maximal binding (IC50) of cell-surface receptors is produced with approximately 0.18 nM erythropoietin, indicating that only approximately 6% of the receptors would be bound in the presence of 10 pM erythropoietin. Other effective erythropoietin-mimetic ligands that dimerize receptors can evoke the same cellular responses but much less efficiently, requiring concentrations close to their Kd values (approximately 0.1 microM). The crystal structure of erythropoietin complexed to the extracellular ligand-binding domains of the erythropoietin receptor, determined at 1.9 A from two crystal forms, shows that erythropoietin imposes a unique 120 degrees angular relationship and orientation that is responsible for optimal signalling through intracellular kinase pathways.
5160720	Atomic coordinates for subtilisin BPN' (or Novo).	null
